DYNAMIC PAGE - HIGHEST
POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA
AUS CAN GBR NZL

Welcome! Saturday, 10 Nov 2012

•	Web search

•	Agency-all Emails

•	SED-all Emails

•	NS A Rolodex

•	SCOAWK: The SID Mailbag

•	SEDtoday Blog

•	SEDtoday Series

•	SIGINT Worldwide	VTC * •

•	SEDtoday Article

•	Letter to the Editor

•	SIGINT-y Social Media Page

(U) The SIGINT Philosopher: Unlike All My Terrible Teammates, I Am a

Wonderful Teammate

FROM: (U//FOUO)

Run Date: 09/17/2012

(U//FOUO) Like many of you, I recently finished providing
my supervisor with written bullets summarizing my
achievements to help her with the task of completing my
yearly ACE assessment. As I sought for just the right
phraseology that would demonstrate how irreplaceable I am, I
found myself using phrases like "produced 50% of all
reporting on a team of seven people," or "was the only team
member who did such-and-such." They were all some version
of indirectly saying "I am more productive than other people."

(U) Then, I had to complete bullets for the collaboration
section, hi which I tried desperately to show that while
outperforming everyone else, I also somehow managed to
help them out in such a way that they were more productive
because of me. Which means I then had to talk about the great
work done by those same people I supposedly outperformed
blindfolded with my hands tied behind my

SERIES:

The SIGINT
Philosopher

1.	The SIGINT
Philosopher Is
Back — with a
New Face!

2.	The SIGINT
Philosopher:
Descartes Would
Have Been a
Lousy SIGINT
Reporter

3.	The SIGINT
Philosopher:
When Brevity Is
Just the Soul of
"Huh?"

4.	The SIGINT
Philosopher: hi
Praise of Not
Knowing

5

outperformed blindfolded with my hands tied behind my
back. This highlights what I think is an inherent weakness in
our promotion system (and most promotion systems): the
people we're supposed to be cooperating with to get the job
done are the same ones we're competing with for limited
promotion and awards dollars.

(U) My guess is that if you are thinking about getting
promoted, it probably complicates your calculus somewhat
when you are making decisions about how to spend your time
in a day. If you are a subject-matter expert, and something
really juicy and interesting but also difficult comes in, do you
knock it out yourself, or do you spend extra time to have
someone newer handle the work with guidance from you?

(U) Judging from many offices I've been in, I would say that
at least sometimes, the prevailing prejudice is that it's better to
be able to take credit for doing something important without
help than it is to claim you enabled others to do the same
work. If you think about it, it's also a much easier bullet to
write. "Wrote 40% of reports on a team of eleven people" is
easier to understand and sounds more impressive than
"helped give a lot of people who were feeling underutilized a
purpose in life by giving them stuff to do that mattered," or
"helped someone to do a good job on it even though it took
more tune to do that than it would have taken to do it myself."

(U//FOUO) I work on a very small team, and so for most
work, I don't have much choice but to do it myself. But I have
felt this same mg in my own work, and confess I sometimes
feel impatient while explaining tilings to others, because deep
down, I sense it is hurting my ability to afford to send my son
to MIT one day.*

(U) Almost everyone has mentoring as part of their
objectives, but it is much easier to document "formal"
mentoring, such as a role in a professional organization, than
it is to document informal day-to-day helping out of the
people around you. Lebron James (the basketball player) will
never get the respect Michael Jordan did, because nobody
cares that you found the open guy for the winning shot with
five seconds left instead of taking the shot yourself. In fact,
your office "Lebron" has it even worse than the real one does:
there are no statistics to record ad hoc office assists.

The SIGINT
Philosopher:
Unlike All My
Terrible

Teammates, I Am
a Wonderful
Teammate
The SIGINT
Philosopher:
Lessons for Civil
Servants from the
American Civil
War (That Don't
Concern Killing
Vampires)

(U) But assists should matter. When I worked at a large
corporation once, they had a system to try to rewa d

corporation once, they had a system to try to reward
employees for helping each other. Essentially, everyone got a
certain number of points they earned each month that could be
apphed to purchases from a rewards program. It was a really
good rewards program, and people really used those reward
points. In addition to the ones you got for yourself, you got
some points you could give to someone for helping you out at
work. It was a major incentive to help other people. Some
employees who were especially helpful covered their entire
Christmas shopping using those reward points.

(U) The notion of "peer performance review" has
apparently taken off in some circles. According to a 31 July
2012 article in the Wall Street Journal (see it here), some
firms are using peer performance reviews as a way to flatten
management and encourage teamwork. Bloggers commenting
on this article pronounced that "The manager-driven, once-a-
year performance review may soon become a thing of the
past. Good riddance."

(U) Admittedly, there are some problems with peer
performance review. One big issue is the same one that
plagues internet news sites that allow comments: junk
feedback. While it is probably dangerous to completely base
rewards on employee feedback, I have to believe that what
peers think about an employee has to mean something. If a
branch manager thinks that an employee deserves 10% of his
branch's available rewards, but the branch rank and file feel
this person deserves none, that shows at the very least that
there is a problem somewhere.

(U) I don't think I've spent a day in my career as a post-9/11
hire where I haven't heard about the importance of
collaboration. If it really is that important, it seems like it
ought to be have some metrics other than those dreamt up in
my own self-conflicting — and self-conflicted — bullets.

(U) Notes:

* (U) My son will never go to MIT. In order to multiply by
sevens, he has to physically walk across the room to imagine
himself scoring a touchdown for each factor of seven.

(U//FOUO) Have thoughts on this topic? Post them on the

related Tapioca Pebble.

(U) Standard disclaimer: The opinions expressed by the
SIGINT Philosopher are his own and do not necessarily

Comments/Suggestions about this article?

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or
reposted outside NSANet without the consent of S0121
(DL sid_comms)."

Information Owner:

Page Publisher: |

Last Modified: 11/10/2012 / Last Reviewed: 11/10/2012

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE
CLASSIFICATION IS

TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR

NZL

DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007
DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108