TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

EP-3E Collision:
Cryptologic Damage Assessment
and Incident Review

Final Report

Prepared by the

EP-3 Cryptologic Assessment Team
July 2001

Classified by: NSA/CSS Classification Manual
Dated: 23 February 1998

Declassify on: XI	Copy #

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(U) Pr

refa ce

(U//FOUO) On 1 April 2001, a People’s Republic of China (PRC) F-8-II fighter

collided with a U.S. N avy EP-3E electronic surveillance aircraft operating over the South
China Sea. The EP_3E aircraft survived the collision and subsequently recovered in the
PRC at Lingshui Airfield on Hainan Island. Th e crew was detained by the PRC for 11
days before being repatriated to the United States. Thi s report is a review and assessment
of the EP-3E incident, as directed by the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) and the
Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service (DIRNSA).

(U//FOUO) The information used to prepare this report was derived from two
rounds of debriefing the 24 EP-3E crew members, a review of documentation relevant to
the conduct of airborne SIGINT surveillance operations, interviews with numerous
individuals and organizations associated with the event, data collected from reenacted
destruction testing, and analysis of the recovered aircraft. Thi s report details the
materials and equipments presumed compromised to the PRC and estimates the damage
from the compromise. It describes the crews reactions from the time of the collision
until the crew and aircraft came under control of the PRC at Lingshui ^\irfield. It reviews
emergency processes and procedures, potential PRC actions, foreign relations impact,
counterintelligence issues, and cryptologic crisis response. F inally, the report
recommends actions to minimize and manage the risk of like events in the future.

(U//FOUO) This is a final report, delivered to the CNO and DIRNSA. All

previous reports of cryptologic loss and impact from this event are superseded. The
Commander, Naval Security Group, is responsible for coordinating analysis and reporting
of any subsequent findings developed from examination of the recovered EP-3E.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

iv

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(U) E.

Su

xecutive Summary

(S) T he collision of a PRC F-8-II with a U.S. EP-3E over the South China Sea on
1 April 2001 triggered a series of events, the outcomes of which ranged from very good
to very poor. Through superb airmanship and teamwork, 24 crew members and an $80
million aircraft were saved. COMSEC keying material and ELINT data were largely
jettisoned. The crew acquitted themselves well while detained. Conversely, sensitive
COMINT equipment, large volumes of technical data, and SIGINT policy directi v
compromised.

ives were

(S) T his assessment addresses two interrelated tasks. Th e first was to review and
assess the damage to cryptologic sources and methods from the compromise of COMSEC
and SIGINT material and the response of the U.S. Cryptologic System (USCS) to the

. The second was to review and assess emergency destruction, classified material

crisis.

handling, communications, and emergency procedures.

some

(S) The USCS response to the crisis was generally good. Th e report makes
recommendations regarding policy and dissemination that should further improve

customer support. NSA’s separate internal look at its crisis procedures promises to result

in additional improvements.

(S) D amage to U.S. COMSEC products and methods, i.e., cryptographic devices,
keying material, and encryption methodology, was low, primarily due to design
philosophy. Cryptographic devices are designed in anticipation of being lost or
compromised. Th e significant portion of the encryption process —the key— is normally
changed daily. W ithout the key, adversaries cannot decrypt or read U.S.

communications, even if they have obtained the cryptographic device and have the target
communications. Procedures for superseding key are routine and efficient. In this

incident, within 15 ho urs of the EP-3E’s landing in the PRC, all keying materials, except

for the Global Positioning System (GPS) worldwide key, were superseded. The crew
jettisoned most of the onboard keying material.

(S) There is no such holistic approach for SIGINT material. The assumption has
been that sensitive SIGINT material will be protected or destroyed before it is lost or
compromised. However, events again proved this premise wrong. Emergency
destruction techniques have not kept pace with technology and are not always suited for
an era where capabilities reside in software, not hardware. W hen, for a variety of
reasons, emergency destruction was not carried out effectively, compromise of SIGINT
capabilities to the PRC resulted. Damage to the whole of U.S. and allied SIGINT
capability against the PRC i s assessed to be low (i.e., little or no damage, recoverable in
the normal course of operations). Damage in the realm of tactical SIGINT is assessed to
be medium (i.e., significant damage, recoverable with concerted effo rt). These are worst-
case assessments. Importantly, no national sources or methods were compromised.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

v

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S) The EP-3E incid

ent revea

led SIGINT

emergency destruction procedures to be

outdated and inadequate. Moreover, individual and crew training were deficient.
Emergency destruction training —when practiced— lacked realism and context. There
were no readily available means or standard procedures for timely destruction of
computers, electronic media, and hardcopy material. Procedures for control of classified
information were generally adequate but not followed completely. Configuration of
SIGINT systems and software lacked policy standards and management guidelines.

Finally, destruction activities were complicated by communication problems. The crew’s

ability to communicate was impacted by noise, system configuration, and the
kaleidoscope of actions attendant to preparations for bailing out, then ditching, and
finally, landing at Lingshui. Notwithstanding the chaotic circumstances on the aircraft
following the collision, we conclude that the crew had sufficient time to jettison all
sensitive materials. We believe that better policy, training, communications, and
capabilities would have improved the outcome of the emergency destruction efforts.

(S) Prompt corrective action is needed in many areas. Foremost is a need to
address a systemic complacency regarding the safeguarding of sensitive information.

This incident clearly demonstrates the power of the unitary approach taken for COMSEC
material, one founded on the assumption that material will be lost or compromised and
that safeguarding information, not destroying material, is the ultimate goal. This
philosophy led to creation of a regime designed to prevent exploitation of U.S.
communications despite loss or compromise. A similar approach to SIGINT systems and
information is needed commencing with the same goal of safeguarding information by
preventing exploitation. F rom that basis, it is possible to shape specific means (e.g.,
physical destruction, encryption, overwriting data) with governing standards,
configuration management, and training to reduce or even eliminate damage from loss or
compromise of SIGINT i nformation.

(S) In the course of our inquiries, many have suggested the need for a universal
solution to SIGINT destruction. Because of the range of current capabilities in use, we
have not found one. New safeguard capabilities are needed. Promising areas of
development include the use of encryption techniques to render information on a laptop
useless if compromised. As plans call for more and increasingly sensitive SIGINT
capabilities to be fielded, new safeguard capabilities are required not only for SRO
platforms, but for all SIGINT collection activities at risk.

(U//FOUO) This report makes recommendations for improvements and suggests
an action agency for each. Some are already completed or ongoing. All need to be
tracked to completion, examined for applicability across all activities, not just SRO, and
institutionalized. F ailure to address these issues decisively will not just continue the
likelihood of future losses, it will guarantee it.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

vi

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(U) Key Fi ndings

(U//FOUO) The EP-3 Cryptologic Assessment Team reached the following

conclusions,

(S) Potential damage to tactical U.S. SIGINT capabilities against the PRC

from the compromise of tactical sources and methods is assessed to be

medium.

(S) Potential damage to overall U.S. SIGINT capabilities against the PRC as a

result of materials compromised is assessed to be low.

(S//SI) The greatest potential for PRC intelligence gains is in the area of
analyzing and potentially emulating U.S. COMINT signals analysis
equipment and methodology, especially the LUNCHBOX PROFORMA
processor and MARTES analysis tools.

(U//FOUO) The incident revealed a systemic complacency regarding policy,
planning, and training support to EP-3E SRO missions.

(S) Overall damage resulting from the compromise of cryptographic
equipments and materials is assessed to be low.

(S) The greatest potential for PRC COMSEC gains is in the area of analyzing
and potentially emulating U.S. COMSEC tradecraft.

(S//SI) T he fact of the U.S. ability to acquire and locate signals associated
with PRC submarines was compromised.

(S//SI) National-level U.S. SIGINT (e.g., Special Collection Service,
Overhead, Clandestine SIGINT) sources and methods were not compromised.
(S//SI) As of July 2001, the U.S. Cryptologic System has not detected any
changes to PRC or other countries communications resulting from the EP-3E
compromise.

(S//SI) Compromised signals processing capabilities will not allow the PRC to
make any advances in exploiting U.S. encryption systems, nor will it allow the
PRC to discover any flaws in the protection of its own communications.
(U//FOUO) There was no configuration management process in place for
control and inventory of deployed SIGINT materials and equipments.

(C) The overall potential foreign relations impact from compromise of
materials onboard the EP-3E is assessed to be low.

(C) T he EP-3E incident was multifaceted (e.g., military operational,
diplomatic, intelligence compromise) but data flow beyond the normal
military audience was initially limited.

(C) R estrictions on dissemination of raw SIGINT led to frustration and
misunderstanding among some customers.

(U//FOUO) No specific guidance existed regarding Mission Commander or
aircrew actions should an SRO aircraft be forced or, through emergency, be
required to land in the PRC.

(C) A substantial amount of non-mission-essential classified information was
carried onboard the aircraft.

































TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

vii

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1







(C) Inventory procedures did not require sufficient detail to identify reliably
the content of classified equipments, computers, or hardcopy materials.

(C) Crew training for emergency destruction was minimal and did not meet
squadron requirements; this deficiency was the primary cause of the
compromise of classified material.

(C) There was sufficient time to jettison all sensitive materials from the
aircraft.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

viii

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(U)

Ta

able

of

Co ntents

(U) P refac e

(U) E xecutive Su m mary
(U) Key F indings

1.0	(U) Introduction		1
2.0	(U) M	ethodology	3
3.0	(U) C,	5 llision Incident Summary	5
4.0	(U) SIGINT Review and Assessment		9
	4.1	(U) Key F indings	
	4.2	(U) CO M I NT Equipment and Documentation	
	4.3	(U) ELINT Equipment and Documentation	
	4.4	(U) SIGINT Configuration and Materials Management	
5.0	(U) IA Review and Assessment		23
	5.1	(U) Key Findings	
	5.2	(U) Cryptographic Tutorial	
	5.3	(U) Cryptographic Materials and Equipments	
	5.4	(C) Potential for PRC Intelligence Gain from IA Compromises	
6.0	(U) PRC P otential Actions and the Cryptologic Response		29
	6.1	(U) Key Finding	
	6.2	(u) SIGINT Collection Strategy	
	6.3	(U) Cryptologic Foreign Partner Impact	
	6.4	(U) PRC Sharing and Previous Access to Compromised Data	
	6.5	(U) Counterintelligence Issues	
	6.6	(C) Potential for Recovery of Jettisoned Equipment	
7.0	(U) U.S. Cryptologic System Crisis Response		37
	7.1	(U) Key Findings	
	7.2	(U) SIGINT Support	
	7.3	(U) IA Crisis Response	
	7.4	(U) Crisis Management	
	7.5	(U) Communications and Interagency Coordination	
	7.6	(U) SIGINT Policy Issues	
	7.7	(U) Customer Views	

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

	CO  r--~-	(U) Crew Debriefing Procedures	
	7.9	(U) Damage Assessment P rocedures	
	7.10	(U) Recommendations	
8.0	(U) E	mergency Processes and P rocedures	43
	8.1	(U) Key Findings	
	8.2	(U) Policy	
	8.3	(U) Radio Communications	
	8.4	(U) Internal Communications	
	8.5	(U) Classified and Sensitive Material Handling	
	8.6	(U) Emergency Destruction Policy, Procedures, and Training	
	r--~-  CO	(U) Crew Reaction	
	8.8	(U) Other Tactical SIGINT Platforms	
9.0	(U) Systemic Issues		59
	9.1	(U) Key Finding	
	9.2	(U) Discussion	
	9.3	(U) Recommendation	
(U) G	lossary		61
(U) A	ppendi	ces	
Appendix A		(U) Summary of Recommendations	66
Appendix B		(U//FOUO) List of Cryptologic Equipment and Information	
		Compromised	72
Appendix C		(U//FOUO) Cryptologic Foreign Partner Impact	87
Appendix D		(U) Destruction Test Procedures	91
Appendix E		(U) EP-3E Radio Equipment and Networks	94
Appendix F		(U) Schematic of EP-3E with P osition Identifications	96
Appendix G		(U) Other Tactical SIGINT Platforms	97
Appendix H		(U) Crisis Response Interviews	101
Appendix I		(U//FOUO) EP-3 Cryptologic Assessment Team Members	103
Appendix J		(U//FOUO) EP-3 Incident Assessment and Review Terms	
		of Reference	104

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

1.0	(U) Introduct i o n

(C) T he EP-3E incident resulted in compromise of classified and sensitive S ignals
Intelligence (SIGINT) and Communications Security (COMSEC) equipment and

information. It also illuminated deficiencies in policy, emergency procedures, and
classified material control.

(C) For damage assessment purposes, we have assumed the worst case, i.e., the
PRC will fully exploit the compromised equipments and materials and apply what it
learns to maximum advantage. It may be several years before we can judge how the PRC
actually applies intelligence gained from the compromised information, and any such
assessment will be conducted against the backdrop of ongoing upgrades to PRC
capabilities. In some instances, we are highly confident of the nature and extent of data
compromised; in other cases, such as those involving electronic media or the contents of
personal notes and working aids, we are less confident. Factors affecting our confidence
include the effectiveness of attempted destruction of the equipment, PRC ability to
recover data from damaged media, the accuracy of crew member recall regarding
classified information in their control, and configuration management practices.

(C) This assessment focuses on potential gains to the PRC from compromised
equipments and materials. Damage could increase if the PRC shares compromised
information with other nations.

(C) To characterize damage to SIGINT sources and methods and COMSEC

products and methods, we use low, medium, and high ratings. Each term refers to the
ability of the U.S. C ryptologic System to recover from the compromise:

Low:	Little or no damage, recoverable with a normal level of effort.

Medium:	Significant damage, recoverable with concerted effort.

High:	G rave damage, assessed to be unrecoverable.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
2

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

2.0	(U) Methodology

(C) T he C hief of Naval Operations (CNO) and the Director, National Security
Agency (DI RNSA) established the EP-3 Cryptologic Assessment Team on 27 April
2001. T he team's purpose was to assess the cryptologic damage from the EP-3E's l anding

on Hainan Island and to make recommendations to improve processes and procedures for
future Sensitive Reconnaissance Operations (SRO) missions. Representatives from the
Department of the Navy, National Security Agency, Department of the Air F orce, and
Department of the Army served as members of the team. The team focused on all
materials and equipments onboard the EP-3E when it departed its staging base in Japan,
actions and decision-making during the mission and until repatriation, and the condition
of recovered cryptologic materials and equipments. To accomplish the assessment, the
team reviewed all materials from the crew's Hawaii debriefs, re-interviewed the entire
crew in M aryland, met with Intelligence Community personnel, examined an EP-3E at
P atuxent Naval Air Stati on, visited units engaged in SRO missions, reenacted destruction
testing, and analyzed the recovered aircraft.

(U//FOUO) T o promote openness, Navy mishap procedures were followed. Thus,
a confidentiality memorandum, authorized by the Secretary of the Navy, was offered to
and accepted by each individual. Thi s agreement stated that any information provided by
the crew would be used only for the purposes of this damage assessment and would not
be made available for any other purpose. The purpose for offering a promise of
confidentiality was to overcome any reluctance of an individual to reveal complete and
candid information surrounding the event.

(U//FOUO) T he team received invaluable assistance from the Joint Personnel
Recovery Agency (JPRA) which played a primary role in repatriating the crew. JPRA
personnel provided unique insight on the Hawaii debriefings and trained assessment team
members on interview techniques and processes. The JPRA psychologist who
accompanied the crew in Hawaii was also present with the team and the crew throughout
the M aryland re-interviews.

(C) F urther examination of returned EP-3E systems and other carry-on materials
may yield additional insight into the PRC's success in exploiting this compromise. The
Commander, Naval Security Group, is responsible for coordinating analysis and reporting
of any subsequent findings developed from examination of the recovered EP-3E. A lso,
continued vigilance by the Intelligence Community for signals, human, and imagery
intelligence that might indicate that the PRC i s using data gleaned from this compromise
is prudent.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
3

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
4

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

3.0

(U) C

ollision

I ncident

S

um mary

(S//SI) At 1947Z on 31 March 2001, an EP-3E aircraft (Bureau Number 156511)

departed Kadena Air B ase, Okinawa, Japan, with 24 crew members onboard for a
scheduled CINCPACFLT -tasked Sensitive Reconnaissance Operations (SRO) mission in
the South China Sea. The crew's primary tasking was to monitor the signals environment
of the People's Republic of China (PRC) , with emphasis on PRC S outh Sea F leet tactical

communications, radars, and weapons systems.

(S//NF) The mission aircraft proceeded southwest from Okinawa to SRO track
5Q2002 (F igure 1) , flying west between Taiwan and the Phil ippines before following the
coastline of the PRC past H ong K ong toward Hainan Island. The mission aircraft then
flew steadily in a southwesterly direction approximately 60 nautical miles (nm) off the
coast of Hainan Island in international airspace. Acti vity was light, with only Early
W arning and Air T raffic Control radars and routine military communications checks
interce pted. The EP-3E was steady on course 220 at 22,500 feet, flying at an airspeed of
185 knots. Weather was clear with seven-mile visibility and a broken cloud layer at

15,000 feet.

(S//SI) Beginning at approximately 0043Z, Chinese linguists aboard the EP-3E
and operators at the Kunia Reg ional Security Operations Center (KRSOC) intercepted
acti vity on Lingshui Airfields primary frequency. The activity included ground
controller and pilot communications checks, fighter pre-flight activities, takeoff

Figure 1

(S//NF) SRO T rack 5Q2002

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
5

Ht>!

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

sequence, and ground-controlled intercept. At this time the EP-3E was approximately 70
nm due east of Lingshui near the end of its outbound leg and approaching its turnpoint to

return to base. Between 0048Z-0049Z both the mission aircraft and KRSOC issued
advisories on the PRC reaction to the presence of the EP-3E. At 0051Z, the

aircraft acknowledged receipt of the KRSOC advisory via secure satellite
communications.

e mission

(C) T he EP-3E reported visual contact with two F-8 II fighters at 0055Z. The

M ission Commander and Senior Evaluator decided to make the last turn to the northeast
early, before the fighters moved closer to the EP-3E. The M ission Commander initiated
a slow left turn, steadying on course 070 by 0100Z. During the turn, the PRC fighters
maintained a distance of approximately one mile from the EP-3E.

(C) At approximately 0102Z, one fighter commenced the first of three distinct
approaches to the mission aircraft from its left rear quarter while the other fighter
maintained station approximately one half-mile behind, below, and to the left of the
mission aircraft. On the first approach, the fighter closed to within ten feet of the mission
aircraft. The PRC pilot rendered a salute and fell back to approximately 100 feet off the

left wing of the EP-3E. At 0103Z, the same fighter approached the mission aircraft a

second time, closing to within five feet. W hile in close formation with the mission
aircraft, the PRC pilot was observed with his oxygen mask unfastened, gesturing to the
EP-3E. T he fighter then fell back to approximately 100 feet off the left wing.

(S//SI) At 0104Z, the PRC fighter closed on the mission aircraft again, exhibiting

a much greater closure rate than in the previous two approaches. In an apparent
maneuver to decrease his closure rate, the PRC pilot increased his angle of attack.

Alth ough the maneuver did decrease the closure rate, it placed the fighter directly below,

and in very close proximity to, the EP-3E' s left wing. At 0105Z, the PRC pilot reported
that he was unable to maneuver and was being sucked in by the EP-3E.

(C) At 0105Z, the F-8 II impacted the EP-3E' s left outboard propeller just forward

of the F-8 II' s vertical stabilizer. The resulting structural damage caused the F-8 II to
break in half and lose controlled flight. At the time of the collision, the EP-3E was flying
on autopilot, straight and level. Debris from the PRC fighter impact destroyed the

EP-3E’s nose cone and damaged the number 1 and number 3 propellers and the number 1

engine. Thi s damage caused the EP-3E to roll left nearly inverted and descend
uncontrolled more than 8000 feet before the pilot recovered partial control. Unable to
maintain altitude or cabin pressurization, the EP-3E continued to descend another 6000
feet before full control was regained. The collision of the two aircraft occurred near

position 1735N 11055E, approximately 70 nm southeast of Hainan Island.

(C) W hile still in the dive, the M ission Commander ordered the crew to prepare to
bail out. Th en, with partial control restored but the aircraft still losing altitude, the
M ission Commander gave the order to prepare to ditch. At0113Z , the aircraft issued a
MAYDAY call via its secure satellite communications and indicated a mission abort, on
course 300 degrees at 240 knots. Once the flight crew was able to maintain altitude at

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
6

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

8000 feet, they weighed their bail out and ditching options. Given the uncertainty of the
crews chance of surviving a bailout and the low likelihood of the damaged and difficult-
to- control EP-3E surviving a ditching attempt, the M ission Commander elected to try to

land the aircraft.

(C) The nature of the damage to the number 1 engine and the unknown extent of
damage to the rest of the aircraft dictated that a landing take place as soon as possible,
before the aircrafts condition further deteriorated. Th e navigator directed a course to

Lingshui Airfield, where the pilot made a successful no-flap landing at 0134Z. No crew
was injured during the incident. At 0141Z, the mission aircraft reported, "On deck at
Lingshui, via secure satellite communications.

(C) Prior to landing, repeated EP-3E MAYDAY calls and requests for assistance
on an international distress frequency (243.0 MHz) went unanswered by PRC controllers
at Lingshui. Continuing attempts to contact the tower without success, the EP-3E
conducted a clearing pass over the airfield at Lingshui before landing. Upon landing, the
aircraft taxied under truck escort, parked off the edge of the runway and continued
running engines for approximately ten minutes before shutting down. Approximately

20-24 PRC military personnel were in the vicinity of the EP-3E, six to eight of whom

were armed with bolt-action weapons. The PRC military personnel did not point
weapons at the aircrew, but the M ission Commander assessed that they were getting
im patient. At approximately 0200Z, the M ission Commander ordered the crew to
deplane, placing the crew and the aircraft in PRC control.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
7

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
8

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

4.0

4.1

e v i ew a n

d A

ssess ment

(U) SIGINT R

(U) Key F indings

(S) Potential damage to tactical U.S. SIGINT capabilities against the PRC

from the compromise of tactical sources and methods is assessed to be

medium.

(S) Potential damage to overall U.S. SIGINT capabilities against the PRC as a

result of materials compromised is assessed to be low.

(S//SI) The greatest potential for PRC intelligence gains is in the area of
analyzing and potentially emulating U.S. COMINT signals analysis

equipment and methodology, especially the LUNCHBOX PROFORMA
processor and MARTES analysis tools.

(S//SI) T he fact of the U.S. ability to acquire and locate signals associated
with PRC submarines was compromised.

(S//SI) National-level U.S. SIGINT (e.g., Special Collection Service,
Overhead, Clandestine SIGINT) sources and methods were not compromised.

(S//SI) As of July 2001, the U.S. Cryptologic System has not detected any

changes to PRC or other countries' communications resulting from the EP-3E
compromise.

(S//SI) Compromised signals processing capabilities will not allow the PRC to
make any advances in exploiting U.S. encryption systems, nor will it allow the
PRC to discover any flaws in the protection of its own communications.
(U//FOUO) There was no configuration management process in place for
control and inventory of deployed SIGINT materials and equipments.

4.1.1

(U)

ntrod u ction

(S//SI) The EP-3E carried a complete complement of SIGINT materials and
equipments necessary to conduct its SRO mission against the PRC . In addition to
installed equipment, six carry-on computers were onboard. The most potentially

damaging compromised items were the carry-on LUNCHBOX PROFORMA processor
and a laptop computer with MARTES software tools for collecting, analyzing, and
processing signals. The aircraft also had an extensive inventory of SIGINT
documentation in both hardcopy and electronic media. Am SIGINT materials believed
compromised are listed in Appendix B.

(S//SI) Damage to tactical U.S. SIGINT efforts against the PRC as a result of

materials compromised is assessed to be medium. Tactical collection —those missions
conducted by mobile collection platforms such as the EP-3E— represents only one facet of
the overall cryptologic system sources and methods. Information on national-level U.S.
SIGINT collection sources and methods, such as the Special Collection Service,

Overhead, or Clandestine SIGINT, was not compromised. Add itionally, SIGINT sources
and methods of Second and Third Party foreign partner nations were not compromised.
Overall damage, therefore, to U.S. SIGINT efforts against the PRC as a result of

materials compromised is assessed to be low.

















TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
9

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S) This section reviews potential damage to the U.S. SIGINT system by first
Communications Intelligence (COMINT), and then Electronic Intelligence
(ELINT). Both equipment (e.g., carry-on computers, installed equipment) and
documentation (e.g., technical data, working aids, crew notes) are discussed.

examining

4.2	(U) COMINT E

quipment and Documentation

(U//FOUO) T his section focuses on COMINT, including PROFORMA. The two
lost sensitive systems onboard, LUNCHBOX and MARTES, are discussed in this

secti on.

4.2.1

(U) Findi

(C) All data and software on both the SCARAB computer containing the
LUNCHBOX PROFORMA processor and the laptop containing MARTES

signals analysis tools were compromised.

(S) Overall, compromised PROFORMA -related material could provide the
PRC with an understanding of U.S. PROFORMA exploitation capabilities.
(S//SI) Compromised working aids and PROFORMA-related USSIDs provide
detail about Russian-designed PROFORMA signals used in North Korea,
Russia, Vietnam, and possibly the PRC.

(S//SI) A tape containing enciphered and unenciphered PRC Navy
communications was compromised.

(S//SI) SIGINT technical information, such as S ignals O perating Instructions

(e.g., frequencies, call signs, and target identification data) and information

from 23 USSIDs or excerpt of USSIDs were compromised.

(S) Compromised COMINT documentation included collection tasking
instructions, working aids, and notes focused on Far East Asian targets, as
well as detailed crew member Job Qualification Req uirements (JQR).

(S//SI) The most sensitive documentation compromised was collection
requirement tasking against specific PRC military datalink and microwave
signals. This material provides insight into U.S. exploitation of these signals.
(S//SI) Compromised tasking instructions revealed that the U.S. has acquired
data on an advanced PRC communications system still under development.

(S//SI) U.S. knowledge, at the SECRET//COMINT level, of the PRC

Submarine Launched Ballistic M issile program was compromised.

(S) Compromised SIGINT equipment and material may prompt the PRC to
initiate or expedite COMSEC enhancements.

4.2.2

(U) COMINT E

quipment

(U//FOUO) COMINT equipment onboard consisted of three carry-on computers
(the SCARAB computer and two laptops) and installed COMINT equipment.

4.2.2.1

(U) LUNCHBOX PROFORMA P

ro cessor

n gs





















TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
10

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S) PROFORMA signals are digital command and control data communications
that relay information and instructions to and from radar systems, weapon systems (e.g.,
surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft artillery, fighter aircraft), and control centers.
Exploitation of this information provides U.S. and allied warfighters nearly instantaneous
situational awareness data from a target country s radar systems. This information

supplements U.S. sensor systems while providing insight into the target country’s

decision process.

(S//SI) For this particular mission, the Science and Technology (S&T) O pe rator
was tasked to collect and process PROFORMA signals possibly associated with PRC
SA-10 surface-to-air missiles and PRC short-range air navigation. The SCARAB
portable computer loaded with the LUNCHBOX PROFORMA processor (F igure 2) was
used for this task. The LUNCHBOX processor provides unique capabilities to process
worldwide PROFORMA signals and contains electronic media documentation pertaining
to many of those signals.

(C) R

ecovered

Figure 2

LUNCHBOX PROFORMA

pro cesso r

(S//SI) The LUNCHBOX processors capabilities are substantial. Its software can
process 40 worldwide PROFORMA signals, some teleprinter and pager signals, U.S.
unmanned aerial vehicle datalink signals (for the HUNTER and PREDATOR UAVs);
and the Joint ^Air to SS urface SStand Off M i ssi le (JASSM) datalink. The PRC is known to
use two of the signals resident in LUNCHBOX. Add itionally, LUNCHBOX contained
detailed working aids for 29 of the 40 PROFORMA signals.

(S//SI) Two PROFORMA-related USSIDs (212 and 342) -stored

on electronic

media that was possibly compromised - and several working aids provided detail about

Russian-designed PROFORMA signals used by North Korea, Russia, V ietnam, and
possibly the PRC. This material detailed the association of signals to specific weapon
systems.

4.2.2.2

(U) MARTES

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
11

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S) MARTES i s the name of a set of software tools for collecting, analyzing, and
processing signals and was loaded on a laptop computer. A new version of MARTES is
released approximately every six months, and it is generally divided into COMINT,

FISINT, and ELINT tools. The COMINT version (1999.0.2) of MARTES was used for

this deployment and was classified TOP SECRET//COMINT. It contained source code,

executable, help, signal parameter files, tutorials, and sample signals. Some of the
sample signals were simulated data while others were real-world intercept.

(S) The MARTES laptop also included a Radio Signals Notation (RASIN)

Manual, RASIN W orking Aid, and associated materials. Together, the RASIN manual

and the aforementioned files provided a comprehensive overview of how the U.S.

Cryptologic System exploits an adversary’s signal environment.

(S//SI) A portable, digital player/recorder used to collect the signals analyzed by
MARTES contained a tape of 45 minutes of enciphered and unenciphered PRC N avy

communications. Th e unenciphered portions carried speech segments that identified
PRC communicants. W hen emergency destruction procedures caused the recorder to lose

power, the tape was locked in the recorder’s drive. The digital recorder was returned on

the recovered EP-3E; however, the tape had been removed.

4.2.2.3

(U) Other COMINT E

quipment

(C) In addition to the carry-on SCARAB computer and MARTES laptop, other
COMINT equipment included the integrated COMINT collection system and the
COMINT S upervisors laptop computer.

(S) The integrated COMINT collection system onboard the EP-3E consisted of
antiquated HF, VHF, and UHF receivers, a rudimentary signal distribution network, and
narrowband cassette recorders. The COMINT collection system used the ALD-9 antenna
and processor package. System display and control terminals did not have the capacity to
store classified COMINT information. Th is equipment suite contained no sensitive
technologies, and presents no compromise concern. The COMINT S upervisor's laptop
contained technical data, USSID s, and other COMINT documentation.

4.2.3

4.2.3.1

(U) D
(U) USSID

ocu mentation

(C) Twenty-three United States Signals Intelligence Directives (USSIDs) or
excerpts of USSIDs were onboard the EP-3E, either in hardcopy or on electronic media
(see Appendix B for a complete listing ). USSIDs are directives issued by DIRNSA as
official policy documents governing SIGINT activities and resources. Separate series of
USSID s cover basic SIGINT guidance; collection; processing of raw intercept data;
requirements, reporting and distribution; and tasking for specific cryptologic activities.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
12

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

4.2.3.2

(U) COMINT D

ocu mentation

(S//SI) EP-3E cryptologic technicians had a variety of technical aids, tasking
documents, and SIGINT governing documents to assist them in collecting PRC tactical
communications from coastal and inland units in the South China Sea. This
documentation outlined specific PRC units of interest to the U.S. and provided detailed
information on Signals Operating Instructions (e.g., target frequencies, call signs), order
of battle, and the periodicity at which this data is to be collected. This information was in
hardcopy format, in documents such as the Intercept Tasking Database and Collection
Requirements Number tasking messages.

(C) Additionally, working aids and technical notes provided detailed background
data on target emitters. Several crew members also carried their individual JQRs for
training and proficiency purposes. F or cryptologic trainees, a completed JQR would
provide specific, classified knowledge of an Area of Operations, e.g., the Far East Asi a n
Region, and general knowledge of cryptologic functions such as collecting and

processing SIGINT d ata.

4.2.4	(U//FOUO) COMINT Eq uipment Damage Assessment

4.2.4.1	(U) LUNCHBOX PROFORMA Pr

ro cessor

(S) The overall damage from the compromise of the LUNCHBOX processor is
considered medium. PRC exploitation of the LUNCHBOX processor would enable them
to process PROFORMA in the same manner as the U.S. T his analysis would provide the
PRC with an understanding of U.S. capabilities against PROFORMA signals and could
lead to an understanding of U.S. capabilities in other signals analysis areas.

(S) E xamination of the recovered LUNCHBOX processor revealed that, while
externally the recovered drive appeared to be in good condition, internally the hard drive
platters were destroyed. Laboratory reenactment of the crews LUNCHBOX destruction
attempts produced no damage to the hard drive. Therefore, the crew's actions are
assessed not to have caused the damage. We believe the PRC shattered the hard drives
after exploiting them. (F or a discussion of the laboratory destruction testing at the

Aberdeen Test Center, see Appendix D.) Though the PRC returned the LUNCHBOX
processor, two unique signals processing circuit boards necessary for the LUNCHBOX to
process PROFORMA signals were missing. All data and software on the LUNCHBOX

processor are considered compromised.

(S//SI) The PRC' s most effective denial methods would be to move from current
overthe’air transmissions to landline transmissions, or to more advanced radio
communications techniques, such as frequency hopping, that could complicate the U.S.
Cryptologic System s exploitation efforts. The PRC could also potentially deny future
access by encrypting these signals, although encryption is not likely. PROFORMA
signals are not routinely encrypted because of their perishable nature and the requirement
to provide fast, dependable data throughput. However, some PROFORMA signals are

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
13

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

carried within other encrypted communication signals and that practice could be
increased. These changes, especially if shared with other countries such as Cuba, Egypt,
Iran, Russia, and Vietnam, could significantly impact U.S. SIGINT support to deployed
U.S. and allied forces.

(C) Damage from the compromise of the

datalink signals and the Joint Air-to-Surface Stand-off M issile (JASSM) seeker video
datalink signal is assessed to be low. These datalink signals are broadcast in the clear and
are unclassified.

(S) In addition to PROFORMA processing software, other signal analysis tools
were loaded on the SCARAB computer. W hile these tools represent valuable capabilities
to the U.S. Cryptologic System, they are all based on open source techniques. P otential
damage from this compromise is low.

4.2.4.2

(U) MARTES

(S) The overall damage from compromised information on the MARTES laptop is
considered medium. The MARTES i aptop sustained no visible damage (F igure 3) , but its
recovered hard drives were found to be shattered. Technical expe rts assess that the crew
did not cause this damage. Based on all available data, we believe that the PRC copied

the laptop’s hard drives and then destroyed them. All data resident on the MARTES

laptop, including signal identification and processing software, working aids, and signal
samples, is considered compromised.

Figure 3

(C) R ecovered	top

(S) T wo factors establish the assessment of this loss as medium: (1) the laptop
included signal-specific processing capabilities, and (2) the laptop had source code, help
files, samples and tutorials that could enable the PRC to extend and modify the
capabilities of the compromised signals analysis tools. Of particular note is that some of
the signal-specific processing capabilities were designed to target PRC syste ms.

(S) Compromised capabilities provide the PRC with a comprehensive
understanding of the level of U.S. signals analysis expertise as of early 1999. The key
factor that limits the severity of the compromise to medium is that these capabilities will

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
14

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

not allow the PRC to make any advances in exploiting U.S. encryption syste
it allow the PRC to discover flaws in the protection of its own communications.

ms, nor wi

(S) Modernized equipments would likely have prevented this compromise.
Computerizing the recording capabilities and providing built-in encryption would
eliminate the use of tape and the associated need for physical destruction.

(S) Additionally, the depth of signal processing capabilities provided by
MARTES was not required for this mission. A tailored system designed to focus on
rapid signals detection, identification, collection, and processing is more appropriate to
the mission.

4.2.4.3

(U) Other COMINT E

quipment

(S//SI) D amage from the compromise of the EP-3E's integrated COMINT

collection suite is considered low. Th e rudimentary nature of the system components will
not provide the PRC with any substantial information on the U.S. ability to exploit any
signals other than basic non_enciphered tactical communications. Th e fact that U.S. SRO
assets collect tactical communications on PRC targets is already known to the PRC. The
PRC could attempt to reverse engineer the ALD-9 antenna and processor system, but
information and specifications on more capable systems is readily available in open
source literature.

(S) No physical destruction was performed on integrated COMINT equipment
due to the unavailability of proper destruction devices. The crew did zeroize all receivers
and partially purge the master system display and control terminal. In addition, cassette
tapes were extracted from narrowband recorders, stretched, and possibly torn. Th ese
tapes remained on the aircraft.

(C) D amage from the compromise of the COMINT S upervisor's laptop is
considered low, due to the significant damage inflicted by the crew. Alth ough the
damage was severe, the PRC's ability to recover data from the hard drive cannot be ruled
out. Damage from the possible compromise of USSIDs and other documentation on this
laptop is discussed below in Section 4.2.5.

4.2.5

(U) COMINT Do

D

ocu mentation Damage Assess men t

As

(S//SI) The compromise of the largely tactical COMINT documentation is rated
medium. The most sensitive and damaging documentation compromised was contained
in collection requirements hardcopy documents that detail U.S . tasking against PRC
military datalink and microwave signals. The tasking data, containing information such
as frequencies, data rates, dish sizes, and target communicants, outlined the U.S.
capability to exploit digital signals. However, U.S. national collection systems were not

refe renced.

4.2.5.1

(U) T

echnical

COMINT D

ocu mentation

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
15

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S//SI) The U.S. ability to collect PRC submarine signal transmissions and make
subsequent vessel correlations was compromised. This compromise could prompt the
PRC to modify the signal that the U.S. exploits to make vessel correlations. Although its
ability to exploit these signals is limited, NSA is confident that the U.S. Cryptologic
System could recover from any changes to the signal content. Compromised documents
further revealed U.S. direction finding capabilities against PRC submarines. The PRC
could respond by employing COMSEC to elude U.S. direction finding. Further, PRC
communications equipment modifications could complicate NSA' s exploitation efforts.
The overall impact of this compromise is assessed to be medium.

(S//SI) Crew training materials also compromised U.S. knowledge of the PRC's
Submarine Launched Ballistic M issile (SLBM) progra m. The information outlined the
SLBM program s organization, platforms, missile testing operations, and
communications. Although the PRC probably believed that the U.S. possessed this
information, it was probably not aware that the information could be derived from
SIGINT collection and analysis. PRC efforts to deny the U.S. future information on thi
program could be overcome by U.S. cryptologic sources and techniques. T herefore the
impact of this compromise is assessed to be medium.

(S//SI) A lso potentially damaging are compromised tasking documents that
referred to an advanced PRC communications system currently under development. The
PRC could respond by modifying the new system or implementing more rigorous
COMSEC procedures potentially denying the U.S . future insight. Add itionally, realizing
that the U.S. has a means for acquiring data on one of its systems before it is
operationally deployed could prompt the PRC to tighten security in its defense industry
institutes to include COMSEC enhancements. The impact of this compromise is assessed

to be medium.

(S//SI) The potential damage from the compromise of Signals Operating
Instructions is assessed to be low. PRC analysis of this data could reveal in part the
extent to which the U.S. can and does exploit PRC military tactical communications.

As a result, the PRC could change its use of frequencies or call signs, or could move to
deny future airborne platforms access by changing operating times. Frequency and call
sign changes occur with regular periodicity, e.g., monthly, quarterly, annually, and are a
standard operating procedure. Therefore, changes of this type are factored into NSA's
ability to satisfy customer requirements. Of note is that the PRC has not implemented a
major communications change in 15 to 20 years (see discussion in Section 6.2.1).

(S//SI) A mid- to long-term possibility is that the PRC could upgrade its
communications equipments to more advanced signaling systems (e.g., frequency
hopping systems), or it could increase the use of encryption in its communications. The
PRC, as is the case with almost all countries, is constantly upgrading and evolving its
communications capabilities so an eventual migration to more advanced signals can be
anticipated. Incorporating widespread encryption into tactical communications

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
16

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

equipments is costly and cumbersome, and therefore not believed to be a likely outcome

of the EP-3E compromise.

(S//SI) The extent to which compromised JQRs were completed by individual
crew members varied from little to very extensive detail. The most revealing and
potentially damaging JQR materials compromised were completed JQRs and study
guides for the PRC N avy Operator and COMEVAL positions. Th ese JQR materials

detailed specific target information (e.g., frequencies, units of interest) and described
U.S. reconnaissance operating areas, programs, and collection platforms.

4.2.5.2

(U) USSIDs

(S//SI) While overall impact from the compromise of SIGINT directives carried
on the EP-3E is low, three compromised directives are of concern. Of immediate concern
is the known compromise of a hardcopy of USSID 5511 , which details instructions and
information on COMINT A dvisory Support to Sensitive Reconnaissance Operations
(NICKELBACK conditions ). W hile this compromise will not affect the U.S. ability to
perform SRO missions, the PRC could take action to deceive the SIGINT system by
transmitting false information, causing the SIGINT system to provide mission aircraft
with incorrect NICKELBACK conditions. Actual spoofing —imitating U.S.
communications to pass false advisory support to an SRO platform— is extremely
unlikely, since it would require the PRC to have both U.S. communications gear and
daily c ry pto. NSA has evaluated this possibility and concludes that there are sufficient
monitoring assets to readily detect any such denial and deception actions and to advise an

SRO platform

(C) R

ecovered

Figure 4

COMINT S

p

ervisor s

L

aptop

uses on

(S//SI) The possible recovery of USSIDs 107 and 303 from the damaged
COMINT S upervisor's laptop (F igure 4) is of concern. USSID 107 , which focu

special signals recognition and reporting procedures, reveals that the U.S. has the
capability to identify and collect special PRC signals. C oupled with other compromised
SOI data, this compromise would confirm the U.S. ability to monitor special signals
transmitted by PRC submarines. Any SOI changes in these transmissions could result in
significant damage; therefore, this potential compromise is assessed to be medium.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
17

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

USSID 303 (SIGINT R eporters Instructions ) specifies SIGINT interest in the PRC,
North Korea, the Philippines, Cambodia, Vietnam, and Thailand. The PRC s disclosure
of this information could have political implications (see Cryptologic Foreign Partner
Impact, Section 6.3) and could lead to SOI changes in these nations. Th e damage
resulting from this potential compromise is assessed as low.

4.2.6

(U) R

ecom mendations

(U//FOUO) L imit classified and sensitive materials carried onboard SRO
platforms to mission-essential materials only. M inimize hardcopy materials
in favor of electronic media.

(U//FOUO) Identify computer hard drives for priority destruction and/or
jetti son. M ark hard drives with a location for striking to ensure physical
destruction.

(U//FOUO) El iminate source code from fielded software.

(U//FOUO) El iminate tape-based recording, replacing it with computer-based
recorders with built-in encryption.

(S) R emove processing capability for the HUNTER and PREDATOR UAV
and JASSM datalink signals from LUNCHBOX.

(S) Provide a tailored signals processing capability that fully meets mission
requirements for rapid signal detection and identification.

(U//FOUO) R eplace the SCARAB computer key-lock mechanism with a

manual quick-release bolt.

(C) Review compromised USSID material to determine if there is a need to
change, modify, or update any USSID.

(S//SI) C ontinue to monitor PRC communications for evidence of denial and
deception activities related to SRO

missions.

4.3	(U) ELINT Equipment and D ocu mentation

(C) This section focuses on the compromised ELINT equipments and related
ELINT working aids and notes.

4.3.1

(U) Findi

(C) T he EP-3E's installed ELINT equipment was not destroyed.

(C) Most classified ELINT documentation was compromised.

(C) All data on the ELINT E valuator's laptop computer, including a
comprehensive ELINT O rder of Battle, was compromised.

(S) The primary impact of the compromise of ELINT documentation would
be in improved PRC electronic warfare planning against the U.S. and T

aiwan.

4.3.2

(U) ELINT E

quipment















n gs



TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
18

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S//NF) The ELINT systems onboard the EP-3E include a disparate collection of

antennas, signal distribution networks, wideband and narrowband receivers, recorders,
and processing and display equipment. The bulk of these systems are off-the-shelf
devices that, although designed for the ELINT mission, contain no particularly sensitive
technologies. Those systems that represent a specific concern include the AN/ULQ-16
and the AN/ALQ-108. The AN/ULQ-16 i s a computerized pulse processor used to make
detailed timing measurements of radar signals. The AN/ALQ-108 is an enemy IFF
interrogation system used to actively and passively exploit early Soviet IFF and range
extension signals.

(C) Emergency destruction of the installed ELINT equipment by the crew was
largely ineffective. Th e crew did zeroize all memories and erase all mission data, but the
rugged construction of critical components and lack of destruction tools prevented
adequate destruction. The limited damage to this equipment can be circumvented by a
competent reverse engineering effort. It is assessed that all ELINT hardware systems on
the aircraft have been fully compromised.

4.3.3

(U) ELINT D

ocu mentation

(C) Most classified ELINT documentation was compromised. This documentation

included the EPL (ELINT P arameter Limits ), CTEGM (C ollector Technical ELINT
Guidance M anual), and a HULTEC (H ull to Emi tt e r Correl ati on) database, and
miscellaneous notes on PRC and Russian ships and weapon systems. One document
described the tactical employment of the AN/ULQ-16 and discussed radar fingerprinting
techniques and procedures. Equipment maintenance documentation and wiring diagrams
intended for in-flight troubleshooting also remained onboard.

and is considered

(S) T he ELINT E valuator's laptop was left onboard
compromised. Th e laptop contained a comprehensive (worldwide) Electronic Order of
Battle (EOB). Information included locations and names of fixed radar sites, along with
designations of radar systems installed at these sites. Information in the database was
limited to the SECRET level. One file discussed the purpose and employment of the
AN/ALQ-108 and identified similar equipment as being deployed on two U.S. aircraft,

the E-3 AWACS and F05 Eagle.

4.3.4

(U) ELINT Da

A

amage Assessment

(S) The potential damage from the compromise of ELINT data is assessed to be
medium. The EPL reveals the sum of U.S. knowledge at the Secret-level about the
parameters and operating characteristics of most known radars from both U.S. and
foreign manufacturers. Signals described range from air traffic control and early warning
radars to airborne intercept radars and cruise missile seekers. Included are details
of U.S. and allied systems (although not wartime reserve modes), including most
equipment employed by Taiwan. National-level associations with ELINT collectio
not compromised.

ion were

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
19

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S) T he CTEGM details specific gaps in U.S. ELINT knowledge. It tasks

collection against (and thus identifies) suspected wartime reserve modes and poorly
understood operating modes of foreign emitters. It identifies knowledge gaps for both

radar and PROFORMA systems. Exploitation of the EPL and CTEGM could facilitate
PRC electronic warfare planning against the U.S., India, and Taiwan, and allow the
employment of denial and deception techniques tailored to U.S. knowledge gaps.

(S) T he HULTEC database equates precise radar timing measurements (such as
those provided by the AN/ULQ-16) to individual PRC ships and submarines.

Exploitation could allow the PRC to implement changes to shipborne radars that could
temporarily deny the U.S. identification of naval vessels through ELINT.

(S) Exploitation of the EOB could provide the PRC with insights into the
accuracy and extent of U.S. knowledge about PRC radars and early warning networks.
Analysis could reveal the fact of U.S. shortcomings in the ability to produce high quality
information on PRC early warning networks and U.S. uncertainty in identifying certain
types of radars. However, the PRC would not be able to determine the full extent of U.S.
knowledge concerning PRC radar installations since the compromised EOB was limited
in depth.

(S) The technologies resident in compromised ELINT systems would not advance
present PRC technical capabilities. PRC radar and ELINT technologies are advanced to
the point that they are capable of employing all techniques used on the EP-3E. The
primary impact of the compromise of these systems would be in the operational lessons
the PRC learns about U.S. ELINT techniques and procedures. These lessons, if properly
applied, could help the PRC counter U.S. collection efforts as well as improve its tactical

ELINT collection.

(S) Analysis of the recovered AN/ALQ-108 reveals that it was thoroughly
examined by PRC engineers. W hile the AN/ALQ-108 i s technically incapable of
exploiting PRC IFF signals, PRC analysis could reveal that such a capability is easily
within U.S. reach (other U.S. assets are able to exploit PRC IFF signals, and similar
efforts are ongoing). The most likely effects would be increased IFF signals security and
an acceleration of PRC procurement of more advanced IFF equipment.

4.3.5

(U) R

ecom mendations

(U//FOUO) T he first two recommendations in Section 4.2.6 regarding limiting

classified and sensitive materials and identifying computer hard drives for destruction,
among others, apply to ELINT equipment and documentation.

4.4	(U) SIGINT Configuration and M ate rials M anagement

(C) A s this report details, numerous factors contributed to the compromise of
SIGINT data. The damage from this incident would have been significantly lessened if

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
20

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

there existed a unifying cryptologic strategy for preventing information from falling into
an adversary s possession. Such a strategy exists in Information Assurance (IA) , where it
ed that COMSEC equipments will be compromised. Th e triad of controlled

is assume

equipment, encrypted communications, and robust key management significantly
mitigates the damage incurred through the loss or compromise of any single COMSEC
element (see section 5.2). Conversely, SIGINT is founded on a "no compromise"
principle. SIGINT is to be protected at all times and, if it is deemed to be in jeopardy of
compromise or loss, destroyed. This approach lacks flexibility and reflects an era when
SIGINT capabilities resided on hardware and in hardcopy versus today s world where
increasingly these capabilities reside in software.

(C) If SIGINT data cannot be protected or destroyed, then the amount of material
at risk should be minimized by the use of effective controls. This did not occur. SIGINT
equipments and materials were provided to the EP-3E mission in a haphazard manner
Alth ough SIGINT materials are among the most sensitive in the Intelligence Community,
there was a lack of control and oversight of both hardcopy and softcopy items. Software
was disseminated that contained unnecessary files, including programming source code.
Add itionally, there was a lack of guidance regarding SIGINT equipments, software
versions, and documentation allowed onboard the platform. Adequate inventories of
SIGINT materials were not maintained and the crew was allowed to carry excessive and
unnecessary SIGINT materials onboard.

(C) The immediate development and implementation of a governing strategy for
deployable SIGINT equipment and materials is paramount. As the U.S. Cryptologic
System moves toward placing more and increasingly sensitive SIGINT capabilities in the
field, new safeguard capabilities are required not only for SRO platforms, but for all
SIGINT collection activities potentially at risk.

4.4.1

(U) R

ecom mendations

(U//FOUO) Work with industry and the Intelligence Community to develop
and implement safeguard capabilities for SIGINT equipment and materials
used by SRO platforms and other SIGINT collection activities at risk.
(U//FOUO) Develop and implement configuration controls to govern the use
of NSA -deplo yed software versions and maintain cognizance of field
modifications; include procedures to annually overwrite all software with the
most currently available software.





TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
21

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
22

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

5.0	(U) IA Re

5.1	(U) Key Findings

d A

eview and Assessment

*	(S) Overall damage resulting from the compromise of cryptographic
equipments and materials is assessed to be low.

*	(S) The greatest potential for PRC COMSEC gains is in the area of analyzing
and potentially emulating U.S. COMSEC tradecraft.

5.2	(U) Cryptographic Tutorial

(S) U.S. cryptologic equipment contains complex mathematical encryption
algorithms or cryptographic logic. Most U.S. cryptographic systems are designed for
multiple operating environments, including tactical, and it is assumed from the day the
equipment is issued that it eventually will fall into enemy hands.

(S) Cryptographic devices are designed so that the cryptographically significant
portion of the encryption process can be changed frequently, normall y once per day. The
variability takes the form of a stream of random numbers called key. The key basically
tells the built-in encryption system how to vary itself with each character transmitted.

The NSA design philosophy prevents our adversaries from reading U.S. communications
without the key, even if they have obtained the logic and message traffic, provided the
cryptographic system is employed properly.

5.3	(U) Cryptographic M aterials and Equipments

5.3.1	(U) Findings

(S) Though most (estimated 95%) of the sensitive COMSEC materials (keys

and codebooks) onboard were jettisoned, the limited amount of keying
materials that remained onboard were compromised.

(C) COMSEC equipments and material carried onboard the mission aircraft
exceeded mission needs.

(C) An accurate inventory of COMSEC material and devices on the mission
aircraft was difficult to obtain in a timely manner.

(S) The crew zeroized all cryptographic devices left onboard.

(S) The crew did not destroy the cryptographic equipments left onboard.

(S) A ll communications keying materials, except for the Global Positioning
System (GPS) worldwide key, were superseded within 15 hours of the
EP-3E's i anding in the PRC. The GPS worldwide key was superseded by
12 April 2001.

(S) All the cryptographic equipments left onboard have been previously
compromised, though not directly to the PRC.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
23









TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

•	(S) S ome Pacific theater communications from late M arch to early April could

be vulnerable to PRC decryption efforts if the PRC is able to exploit or
reconstruct the keying material left onboard the EP-3E.

5.3.2

(U) Da

amage Assess ment

(S) T he EP-3E carried the complete complement of COMSEC equipments and
keying materials necessary to conduct its SRO mission, including several KY-58 secure
voice and KG-84 secure data devices (F igure 5), KYK-13 and KOI-18 electronic fill
devices, a KL-43 off-line encryption device, and a Global Positioning System (GPS) unit.
The EP-3E also carried keying and other cryptographic materials for its various secure
devices (see Appendix B for a complete list of equipments and cryptographic material
onboard). Top Secret keying material in canisters, entire codebooks, and call sign li sts
were onboard. In all, the EP-3E carried COMSEC materials in excess of what was

needed for the mission. Nearly a months worth of keying material and codebook pages
were carried that were not scheduled to become effective until well after the scheduled
landing. COMSEC devices onboard included unused electronic fill devices and several
installed spare encryption devices.

(C) T

ypical

Figure 5
KG-84 and

KY-58 Devices

(S) The use of an electronic key loading device such as the CYZ-10 D ata Transfer
Device (DTD) can eliminate the risk of hardcopy keying material compromise. These
devices can hold multiple keys, load multiple devices, and are easily zeroized. DTDs
were in the EP-3E inventory but were not carried on the mission aircraft. Had the crew
loaded the key into the DTD and left the key tape at the staging base, destruction of the
key would have been easily and quickly accomplished.

(S//NF) Overall damage from compromised EP-3E cryptographic materials
assessed to be low due in part to the action of the crew and the supersession of keyi
material at risk. All of the compromised keying materials were superseded within

15 hours except for the GPS worldwide key that was superseded by 12 A pril. The

cryptographic equipments onboard were either jettisoned or zeroized.

is

ng

5.3.3

(U) C

ryptographic

M

aterials

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
24

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S//NF) After the flight station regained control of the EP-3E , the crew began

emergency destruction of cryptographic materials (e.g., fill devices, keys, and
codebooks ). Th e crew jettisoned three of the four fill devices (i.e., the KYK-13s and
KOI-18s), key tape canisters, and codebooks in a COMSEC M aterial System (CMS) bo

(see F igure 6). Materials not jettisoned included 16 specific cryptographic keys and

Figure 6

(U) Typical CMS Box

codebooks, a KOI-18, and a KL-43. B efore departing the aircraft, the crew hand tore the
paper materials and spread them throughout the aircraft. However, since the paper
materials were not destroyed with approved equipment such as a crosscut shredder, the
PRC would probably be able to reconstruct the key tape. U.S. experts have demonstrated
the ability to reconstruct tape from pieces torn as the crew described. Examination of the
recovered EP-3E revealed that some torn keying material was retained by the PRC.

(S) Compromised keying material was limited to Pacific network controlling
authorities and the GPS worldwide key. NSA ensured that all non- GPS key was
superseded in less than 15 hours. The GPS worldwide key, controlled by U.S.
SPACECOM, was superseded by	uring this 11 -day period, the GPS

system was potentially vulnerable to PRC exploitati on. The GPS key is used to
authenticate GPS data for the user and the PRC could have potentially used the
compromised key to spoof or mislead system users. However, no anomalies were noted

during the timeframe. GPS key supersession required 11 days because of the key’s

global nature (250,000 end users and some foreign partner use) and the challenges

associated with this first- ever global supersession. U.S. SPACECOM’s lessons l earned

from European operations in the past two years were instrumental in supporting the
massive supersession of the GPS worldwide key. The primary lesson learned by
SPACECOM was to have follow-on editions of GPS key pre-positioned to support
supersession.

5.3.4

(U) Cryptographic Equipments

(TS) S ixteen cryptographic devices remained onboard the EP-3E. Am of these
devices, i.e., KG-84s and KY-58s, were zeroized but not physically destroyed. During
zeroization, all traces of the 128 -bit key are removed from storage of any register or

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
25

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

memory. This process, which involves the multiple overwriting of memory registers with

1’s and 0’s, is 100 percent effective in rendering the data unrecoverable.

(S) There were no maintenance manuals or other supporting documentation
onboard the EP-3E that could aid the PRC in exploitation efforts. Th ese are controlled
items and were not required for this SRO mission.

(S) All of the cryptographic devices that remained onboard the EP-3E have been
previously compromised, though not directly to the PRC. H owever, there is strong
evidence that the PRC has aggressively sought to obtain these equipments. Ai so of note
is that some of these devices, for example components of KG-84 devices, have been
available on popular Internet auction sites.

(S//SI) Compromised cryptographic materials might enable PRC SIGINT units to
decrypt limited U.S. P acific area encrypted transmissions for 31 M arch and 1 April.

Since the PRC possessed the crypto-device from the EP-3E , they would have been able to
decrypt communications if they had:

•	Recorded and retained the communications for future exploitation, and

•	Located and reconstructed the keying material that was hand torn and left
onboard the aircraft.

(S//SI) If the PRC succeeded in this regard, they would have been able to read
those encrypted Pacific area communications passed on 31 M arch and 1 April using the
same key compromised from the EP-3E. T o determine the extent of potential damage,
NSA contacted the Pacific (network) Controlling Authorities to ascertain what
communications were transmitted during these two days. Pacific Controlling Authority
responses indicated that because this was a weekend, there was minimal data transmitted.
Communications susceptible to decryption over this period were limited to low-level,

perishable tactical reports such as KLIEGLIGHTs and TACREPs. T he assessment is that
this data would be of little benefit to the PRC.

5.3.5

(U) R

ecom mendations

(U//FOUO) Limit COMSEC materials and cryptologic devices onboard

deployed platforms to those required to accomplish the platform s mission in a
specific timeframe and in a given area of responsibility.

(U//FOUO) Use electronic key loading devices and leave hardcopy key tape
and canisters at the staging base.

(U//FOUO) M aintain a comprehensive and readily available inventory of all
field-deployed COMSEC materials and cryptologic devices.

(U/FOUO) Ma intain destruction records and supersession messages at the
staging base.

(U//FOUO) Continue to refine procedures for timely supersession of GPS
worldwide key.

(U//FOUO) M ake crosscut shredders available for emergency destruction of
keying material.













TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
26

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

5.4	(U) P ote ntial for PRC I ntelligence Gain from IA C

ompromises

(TS) The greatest potential for PRC intelligence gain from the loss of U.S.
cryptographic information is in the area of implementation security. The U.S.
incorporates high quality randomization and strong fail-safe designs into its keying
material and cryptographic devices. Th ese security measures protect encrypted U.S.
communications from decryption attacks. If PRC technicians successfully exploit the
compromised EP-3E cryptographic material and devices, they would gain information as
to how the U.S. incorporates these security designs. This insight could provide the PRC
with an impetus to incorporate similar designs in its indigenous cryptographic materials
and devices, making U.S. decryption efforts more difficult.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
27

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
28

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

6.0	(U) PRC Potential Actions and the Cryptologic Response

6.1	(U) Key Finding

•	(C) The overall potential foreign relations impact from compromise of

materials onboard the EP-3E is assessed to be low.

(S) This section reviews potential PRC actions and the U.S. Cryptologic System
response, including the SIGINT collection strategy in the wake of the incident and
cryptologic foreign partner impact. It also reviews counterintelligence issues, the
potential for recovery of jettisoned equipment, and PRC interaction with the crew.

6.2	(U) SIGINT Co llection Strategy

(S//SI) NSA does not anticipate major PRC communications procedure changes
as a result of U.S. SIGINT data compromised on the EP-3E aircraft grounded on Hainan
Island 1 ^April 2001. O ne potential result of the compromise might be a PRC decision to
accelerate implementation of planned communications upgrades (such as a transition to
fiber and increased use of encryption) or changes to communications S ignals O peration

Instructions (SOI).

6.2.1

(U) PRC Mi

litary Communications

(S//SI) The PRC military does not generally implement nationwide SOI changes
at once; each service implements SOI changes according to its own plans, and tends not
to adhere to a regular schedule. The last nationwide SOI change occurred over a two-
year period in the early 1980s and it took NSA several months to re-establish continuity
on the target. To date, recovery of that call sign allocation system is still incomplete,
however, this does not affect target continui ty or reporting. Th e most recent smaller scale
SOI change occurred between December 2000 and February 2001, and NSA has almost
completely recovered the changes. If the PRC implements new PLA -wide call sign
systems, it could take from several months to a few years to recover the SOI for general
PRC military operations completely, especially for PRC ground forces.

(S//SI) The PRC regularly uses Denial and Deception (D&D) techniques. As a
result of the compromise of tactical SIGINT information, the PRC could be prompted to
take action to deny U.S. collection of PLA communications. One means of detecting
PRC D&D efforts would be to employ covert collection assets during SRO missions.
These platforms could then monitor P LA communications for departures from the norm
while SRO missions are flying in the area.

(S) Any PRC denial or deception effort would likely affect more than just the U.S.
Cryptologic System. U.S. foreign cryptologic partners using similar SIGINT sources and
methods would be impacted if the PRC implements communications changes as a result
of the compromise.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
29

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S) NSA does not expect the PRC to make major changes in its military radars
and usage, because of the prohibitive expense of refitting all of its aircraft, naval
combatants, and coastal defense units. However, it would not be unusual for the PRC to
modify some of the signal parameters on its military radars. If the PRC changes ELINT
signal parameters, complete recovery would take relatively little time —probably a few
day s— but would be labor intensive, since each entity would have to be analyzed and
recovered separately. NSA monitoring of PRC communications would also reveal
changes in the target's air surveillance PROFORMA signals. The rapidi ty of recovery
from a change would depend upon the extent of PRC signal modifications.

6.2.2

(U) PRC No

on-military Communications

(S//SI) Intelligence on PRC non-military targets is gleaned from a wide variety of
collection sources, none of which is likely to be affected by the compromises associated

with the PRC’s ability to exploit the collection systems and working aids onboard the

EP-3E mission aircraft.

6.3	(U) Cryptologic Fore

6.3.1	(U) Findings

Partner Impact

(C) T he EP-3E carried no data that would reveal Second or Th ird Party

sources or methods.

(C) T a cti c a l S ignals O perating Instructions that enabled cryptologic
technicians to monitor allied airspace for situational awareness and safety of
transit purposes were compromised.

(C) O ne of the EP-3E's avionics systems, the AN/ULQ-16 radar pulse

processor that is used by several foreign partners, was compromised.

(S//SI) The compromised LUNCHBOX PROFORMA processor (see

Section 4.2) included weapons systems command and control signaling
information of foreign partners.

(S) The compromised ELINT P arameters List included detailed emitter
parameters for many radars and weapons systems of foreign partners.

(S) The compromised ELINT Order of Battle included information on foreign
partners radar systems.

(TS//SI) U.S. cryptologic relationships with the United Kingdom, Australia,
Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and Th ailand were identified in crew technical
notes. Although the relationships with the UK and Australia are unclassified,
the fact of relationships with Japan, South Korea, and Th ailand are classified

SECRET//COMINT and the fact of a relationship with Taiwan is classified

TOP SECRET//COMINT.

6.3.2

(U)

ntrod u ction















TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
30

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S) Several cryptologic foreign partner relationships were compromised to the
PRC. T hese losses are not judged to be significant, however, and the overall potential
foreign relations impact of the compromised EP-3E materials is assessed to be low.
Information on cryptologic foreign partner impacts and notification strategy is located in

Appendix C.

(TS//SI) Compromised information included data acknowledging U.S. cryptologic
relationships with Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, and Thailand, SOI related to the airspace
of some partners, such as Taiwan, and PROFORMA data from some partner countries.
This information was located onboard the EP_3E in software tools and hardcopy notes
used by the cryptologic technicians. Information such as SOI enabled the aircraft to
transit safely to its area of responsibility, conduct its mission, and return safely to its
staging base. Oth er information was used to exploit communications of the PRC and
several neighboring countries.

6.3.3

(U) S econd and Third Party Disclosures

(TS//SI) The EP-3E carried no materials that would jeopardize any Second or
Third Party sources and methods. U.S. cryptologic relationships with the United
Kingdom, Australia, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand were identified and
compromised in crew technical notes. Although the relationships with the UK and
Australia are unclassified, the fact of relationships with Japan, South Korea, and Thailand
is classified SECRET//COMINT and the fact of a relationship with Taiwan is classified
TOP SECRET//COMINT. C rew notes also compromised the relationship between the
U.S. and Japanese airborne reconnaissance programs.

(S//SI) O ne of the duties of the EP-3E' s technicians was to support the safe transit
of the aircraft to its area of responsibility through the monitoring of friendly and
potentially unfriendly communications and radar. To accomplish this task, the aircraft
carried significant technical data on target nations such as Russia, North Korea, and
Vietnam, as well as data on friendly nations such as Taiwan. The aircrafts cryptologic
technicians monitored Taiwanese tactical communications to provide situational
data to the EP-3E' s cockpit crew as necessary.

awareness

(S) Compromised technical information included PROFORMA data for nearly
50 nati ons. Add itionally, the Electronic Order of Battle (EOB) database carried on the
EP-3E provided information on the location, number, and type of radars worldwide. The
EOB did not, however, contain parametric data (e.g., frequency, pulse information, power

levels).

6.3.4	(U) D

(TS//SI) The

Australian governme
monitor the external

isclosure Impact

U.S. government's intelligence relationship with the UK and
nt is unclassified, and the fact that U.S. reconnaissance aircraft
environment, e.g., Taiwan, for safe transit purposes is not a major

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
31

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

cause for concern by U.S. partners or allies. The potential impact of the compromise of
the relationship between Japan and the U.S. EP-3E program (U.S . aircraft stage from
Japanese territory) is considered to be low. We assess the impact of compromising U.S.
relationships with South Korea and Taiwan as low for similar reasons. Regarding the
U.S. relationship with Thailand, the impact of that compromise is also considered low,
given the lack of any U.S. basing in country and the overt landing of U.S.
aircraft in Thailand.

reconnaissance

(S) As it pertains to the EP-3E platform, the potential impact of the compromise
of avionics systems and its impact on foreign relations is assessed to be low. The
AN/ULQ-16, a radar pulse processor, was the only compromised system known to be in
use by foreign nations. This early 1980s vintage system employs techniques similar to
those now common in commercial telephony applications. Australia, Taiwan, Japan,
South Korea, Italy and Norway are among the nations that still use this system. The
AN/ULQ-16 is designed to analyze the pulse characteristics of radars, and is particularly
well suited for older tactical systems still widely used in the F ormer Soviet Union, the
PRC, and Korea.

(S//SI) Th e potential impact from PRC disclosure of the LUNCHBOX data to
other countries is a concern. From a SIGINT perspective, the PRC' s exploitation of
LUNCHBOX and the disclosure of its PROFORMA capabilities to foreign partners could
result in a loss of access to some foreign PROFORMA signals by the U.S. and its allies
(see section 4.2). From a foreign relations perspective, the fact that the U.S. has the
ability to monitor the command and control environment of friendly and unfriendly
nations would be of minor concern to some countries. NSA has developed notification
procedures and will coordinate notification of foreign partners with appropriate
Intelligence Community partners.

(S) T he ELINT Parameter L imits (EPL) details the radar characteristics of many
U.S. and allied weapon systems, including most of those in use by Taiwan. F or most
emitters in use by potential PRC adversaries, the PRC likely already has collected most
of this information. Potential foreign partner impact from the loss of the EPL, therefore,
is considered low.

(S) R egarding the EOB , the compromised information could provide the PRC
with a good starting point for identifying the total electronic threat posed by a country,
but it is information that in all likelihood the PRC already has. P otential foreign partner
impact from the loss of the EOB , therefore, is considered low.

6.3.5

(U) R

ecom mendation

(U) Coordinate notification procedures and notify foreign partners of pertinent
information compromised to the PRC.

6.4	(U) PRC Sh

aring an

d P

revious Access

Ac

to Compromised Data

»

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
32

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

6.4.1

(U) O ther |Pote ntial ^Recipients of EP-3E C ompromised Data

(C) T he PRC's leadership will undoubtedly examine its political and economic
objectives and then determine the cost- benefit of sharing the intelligence data with other
countries. The PRC, as with all sovereign states, will take steps necessary to safeguard
its national security interests. Th erefore the information, if shared, will probably be
shared on a case-by-case basis.

(S//SI) At a minimum, eight countries bear close scrutiny by the U.S. Cryptol ogic
System and the Intelligence Community. These countries include North Korea, Vietnam,
Cuba (all deemed to be fraternal Communist states ), R ussia, the Ukraine, Iraq, Belarus
(which engage in military sales and technology transfer with the PRC), and Pakistan (a
strategic partner). Changes in the communications infrastructure of these nations could
pose significant challenges for the U.S. Cryptologic System and its ability to support
policymakers. This list of countries, while not exhaustive, represents a starting point for
community analytic efforts.

6.4.2

(U) P

revious

Cryptologic Compromises to the PRC

(TS//SI//NF) The EP-3E incident was not the first compromise of U.S . tactical

cryptologic sources and methods or other sensitive information to the PRC or its closest
partners. North Korea s seizure of the USS P ueblo in 1968 and espionage cases in the
1980s and 1990s provided the PRC with insight into the U.S. C ryptologic System s

targeting of its tactical and encrypted communications. Th ere are indications that PRC
operatives have actively sought to acquire U.S. COMSEC equipments and manuals.
Additionally, one of the PRC s closest partners, Russia, has acquired similar information
on U.S . targeting of special submarine communications, PROFORMA, and many of the
USSID s that were onboard the EP-3E. A lthough there is no direct evidence that Russia
has shared any of this information with the PRC, the PRC has probably benefited from
information gleaned from previously compromised equipment.

(S//SI) The impact of these past compromises on U.S. intelligence efforts has
been mixed. In some instances, targeted communications have disappeared, i.e., either
ceased transmitting or migrated to other modes of communications, and in others there
were no target changes at all. Regardless of detected target changes, previous
compromises have heightened the PRC' s awareness of its communications vulnerabilities
and increased the probability of the U.S . facing a constantly evolving and more
sophisticated PRC communications target.

6.5

(U) C

ou nterintelligence

ssues

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
33

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

6.5.1

(U) Findi

(C) N ames and organizations of Intelligence Com muni ty and foreign partner
personnel were disclosed in documentation onboard the EP-3E.

(C) Much of the information regarding individual identities was contained in
the forwarding instructions for NSA' s tasking database and in the MARTES
source code.

(C) A substantial amount of personnel data unnecessary for the mission was
onboard.

(C) Initial inspection of the recovered aircraft at Dobbins Air R eserve Base in
M arietta, Georgia, found no evidence of PRC impla nts.

(S) No cryptologic information was compromised as a result of the PRC'
interrogation of the EP-3E crew.

6.5.2

(U) C

ompromise

of Personnel

(S//SI) As a result of the incident, individual identities and their affiliations with
U.S. intelligence operations were revealed to the PRC. M ost names were located in
SIGINT documentation or software, including several dozen individuals identified as
employees of NSA and NSGA M isawa.

(C) Additionally, extensive personnel information was carried onboard by the
crew. Names, addresses, social security numbers and official duties of crew members
and personnel not on the aircraft were disclosed on travel orders and other documents.

(U//FOUO) The NSA Offi ce of Security has contacted all individuals to discuss
these counterintelligence concerns. For some personnel, future assignments and travel
may be adversely affected.

6.5.3

(U) Inspection of Recovered Aircraft

(C) E

xperts in counterintelligence and reverse engineering inspected the returned

aircraft and its contents for equipment tampering and evidence of reverse engineering.
No evidence was found of PRC implants or bugging devices, although it is possible that
an implant could have been undetectable. There were signs of PRC intrusion into many
pieces of equipment that could indicate PRC attempts at reverse engineering.

(S) T he team conducted extensive searches of the interior of the aircraft. These
searches recovered a laptop computer hard drive and several fragments of cryptographic
key, cassette tape, and classified paper documents. During the search process, the team
removed floorboards, insulation and all soft panels, and used borescopes to inspect areas
beyond physical access. F urther analysis of component parts continues.

(S) In all, the team removed and examined over 500 pieces of equipment from the
aircraft and inspected roughly 300 items for evidence of tampering. In some cases, the

n gs











TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
34

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

PRC made little or no effort to conceal its inspection efforts, replacing equipment with
obvious indications that it had been removed and examined (e.g., one piece was mounted
upside down, some equipment was not secured with screws, connectors were not
reattached). In other cases, the PRC' s efforts to reverse engineer some computer boards
and chips were detectable only with a microscope.

6.5.4

(U) PRC I nteraction with the Cr

(C) The crew did not reveal any cryptologic information during its 11-day
detention. PRC personnel interacted daily with the crew and questioned crew members
regarding their duties and their mission. Responses from the crew, no matter how
unbelievable or mundane, were not challenged, and PRC personnel did not pressure the
crew to provide information beyond what was offered. Questioning focused on the
incident, and PRC personnel attempted to gain admissions of guilt or remorse for the
collision. Secondarily, the PRC personnel used the sessions to make political statements
regarding the humane nature of the treatment provided and the peaceful wishes of the
PRC. T hese statements were o fte n cited in conjunction with alleged crimes that the
EP-3E had committed, such as causing the collision, violating PRC airspace, landing
without permission, and spying. The PRC personnel also used the sessions as an
opportunity to lecture crew members on PRC and world history. None of the crew
expressed the view that they felt obligated or intimidated to provide information.

(U//FOUO) A detailed report on the crew's activities and experiences during is
being prepared by the Joint P ersonnel Recovery A gency.

6.5.5

(U) R

ecom mendations

(U//FOUO) R emove names of all individuals and organizations from
forwarding instructions, technical material, and software carried on SRO or
other sensitive SIGINT operations.

(U//FOUO) Reduce the amount of personnel information in mission materials
to the minimum possible. Do not reference organizations, offices, or names of
personnel.

6.6	(U) P otential for R

ecovery

of Jettisoned Equipment

(S) There is a very low probability that the PRC would be able to recover items
jettisoned from the EP-3E. J ettisoning took place over a wide area as the aircraft flew
toward Hainan Island, and consisted of physically small objects. Jettisoned items were

limited to COMSEC and ELINT materials, including a metal box with COMSEC keying
material and codebooks, some COMSEC electronic fill devices, and two ELINT laptop
com puters. Th ere is no evidence that the PRC observed the jettisoning of materials.

(S//NF) The most reliable way to locate small, widely dispersed objects on the
seafloor is through use of a side-scan sonar search system. The PRC has access to these





TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
35

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

systems, but the large search area, bottom topography, and small size of the objects
makes location and recovery of any material very unlikely.

(S//NF) There have been no indications of any PRC recovery efforts other than
initial search and recovery attempts focusing on the F-8 II and its pilot. The Office of
Naval Intelligence is monitoring the area for signs of recovery activity, but limited U.S.
collection assets in the region mean that it is possible that the PRC could conduct such a
search without being detected.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
36

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

7.0

7.1

(U) U.S. C ryptologic System Cr
(U) Key F indings

R

esponse

(C) T he EP-3E incident was multifaceted (e.g., military operational,
diplomatic, intelligence compromise) but data flow beyond the normal
military audience was initially limited.

(C) R estrictions on dissemination of raw ' SIGINT led to frustration and
misunderstanding among some customers.





7.1.1

(U)

ntrod u ction

(U) This section reviews the crisis response activities of the U.S. Cryptologic
System from the EP“3E collision through repatriation of the crew. It is based on

interviews with officials from NSA, JCS, OSD, USCINCPAC, CIA, State, ONI, KRSOC,

and the W hite House (see Appendix H for a complete list ). Th e interviews revealed what
worked well during the crisis, what did not work well, and areas for improvement. The
findings are separated into eight areas: intelligence support, IA crisis response, crisis
management, communications and interagency coordination, SIGINT policy issues,
customer views, the crew debriefing process, and damage assessment procedures.

7.1.2

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

(U) Findi

(S//SI) SIGINT support to the EP-3E via NICKELBACK advisory support

procedures was good.

(C) T he initial CRITIC series reporting the known facts of the collision met
timeliness requirements.

(C) W ithin hours of the incident, the IA system moved to supersede all keying
mate rials.

(C) International distress frequencies were not tasked for SIGINT collection
during reconnaissance missions.

(C) At the time of the event, there was no record or playback capability for the
Pacific Tributary Network (PTN).

(U//FOUO) NSA lacks the ability to immediately surge all available SIGINT

collection assets.

(U//FOUO) Customers generally gave SIGINT support good marks.
(U//FOUO) Interagency communications and coordination worked well.
(U//FOUO) There was no extant guidance for how to conduct intelligence
debriefings as part of JPRA' s personnel recovery procedures.

(U/FOUO) The crews pre~ Easter release and subsequent 30 -day leave period
did not allow for a timely and comprehensive debriefing.

(U/FOUO) The cryptologic assessment team was not established until 26 days
after the incident.

(U/FOUO) There were no guidance documents or directives for conducting an
intelligence compromise damage assessment.

n gs

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
37

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

• (U//FOUO) In general, operating forces and field activities were more
web_enabled than national-level agencies and customers.

7.2	(U) SIGINT Support

(S//SI) O verall, SIGINT support to the EP-3E mission was good. The EP-3E flew
under NICKELBACK advisory procedures and was promptly notified by KRSOC of the
PRC's initial tracking activities. Until the mission landed at Lingshui, advisory
conditions were issued in accordance with procedures.

(S//SI) The CRITIC reporting process worked as designed, delivering the initial
information on the EP-3E situation to customers worldwide and to the extended U.S.
Cryptologic System. The National Security Operations Center (NSOC) orchestrated the
dissemination and coordination of the CRITIC reporting series and convened a
conference of senior intelligence officers at the W hite House, the Pentagon, the State
Department, and CIA. T his conferencing system, known as a NOIWON , enabled senior
personnel to discuss and coordinate events throughout the early stages of the crisis.

(S//SI) T he Pacific Tributary Network (PTN) played a key role in providing initial
insight into the unfolding crisis. NSOC's S pecial Support Acti vity (SSA), KRSOC , as
well as PACROC monitored the initial maydays via the PTN. D uring the crisis, watch
centers monitored these live communications without any capability to record and
retrieve them. Although this could have potentially caused problems in verifying events,
it did not become an issue. Record and playback capabilities have since been installed on

the SSA's PTN syste m .

(S//SI) NSA's ability to know at any specific time the totality of overall collection
against a specific target is fragmented. In a crisis response situation, the result is that
typically 24 hours or more can pass before there is an accurate accounting of all national
and tactical systems arrayed against a target. Although NSA immediately began to
augment or "surge" collection by working with the Intelligence Community to steer
systems such as overhead satellites to increase coverage of the PRC, other collection
assets were not tasked as rapidly. Such a delay can result in important collection
opportunities being forfeited in the early, and perhaps most important, stages of a crisis.

(S//SI) NSA's lack of collection of the EP-3E's MAYDAYs was also cited by

some as an issue. NSA assets collected one broadcast minutes before the EP-3E i anded
at Lingshui, but only because of the re_tasking of an overhead satellite in response to the
CRITIC. Many customers were unaware that the U.S. Cryptologic System does not
routinely monitor international distress frequencies during SRO missions due to resource
constraints and competing priorities for other collection.

7.3	(U) IA Cr

R

esponse

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
38

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S) Crisis procedures for NSA s Information Assurance Directorate (IAD) worked
well. IAD headquarters personnel contacted representatives in Okinawa for assistance in

identifying the EP-3E's COMSEC materials and equipments, and a message was sent to
the appropriate Controlling Authorities on 1 April instructing the supersession of all
affected COMSEC material. IAD personnel ensured that all required keying material
was available in theater or could be expeditiously produced and distributed. Over-the-
air-transfer of keying materials was accomplished where possible. Additionally, NSA's

Joint COMSEC M onitoring Acti vity provided monitoring support to CINCPAC,
CINCPACFLT, and COMSEVENTHFLT during the entire event.

7.4	(U) Crisis M anagement

(S) NSA's N ational Security Operations Center (NSOC) served as the central
clearinghouse for all EP-3E information with the Senior Operations Offi cer (SOO)
handling requests from Defense, CIA, State, and W hite House officials. After two days,
however, the deluge of calls began to impact the SOO' s other duties. Th is led to a
decision to establish an EP-3 desk to serve as the focal point for all EP-3E related
matters. The EP-3 desk stood up officially on Tuesday, 3 A pril. Most customers praised
NSOC' s responsiveness and its twice-daily SIGINT updates. Although the EP-3 desk

performed well, customer inquiries eventually consumed most of the desk officers time.
Some customers sought an EP-3 website where they could go for related data, but such a
site was not established during this crisis. Crisis-related websites at JICPAC and KRSOC

were praised for their usefulness. In general, the operating forces and field activities are
more web-active than national-level organizations.

(U//FOUO) Crisis management procedures are under review in the Defense
Department, specifically focusing on the roles, functions, and interaction of the numerous
watch centers throughout the Pentagon. Similarly, NSA i s studying how to optimize its
new organizational structure for crisis management. I mprovements not withstanding, the
current structure provided effective crisis support during the incident.

7.5	(U) Communications and Interagency Coordination

(S) Communications worked well throughout the incident. A number of those
interviewed cited the State Department-chaired, daily video teleconferences as an
excellent way to coordinate and share information. Similarly, watch officers cited
"ZIRCON chat —essentially an on-going secure chat room available over the Joint
W orldwide Intelligence Communications System secure network — as an effective method
for communicating and sharing information. A limitation inherent in this ty pe of
communication, though, is that information in the chat room is not authoritative and may
be misleading.

(S) Interagency coordination involving the sharing of EP-3E operational
information was described by several parties as problematic. Operational information
that would have been useful outside of military channels was not disseminated. Non-
military customers cite the fact that the EP-3E incident was more than just a military

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
39

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

operational issue, it was also a political, diplomatic, and intelligence issue. In particular,
data sharing by military components during an incident such as this could have, and
should have, been more robust.

7.6	(U) SIGINT P

olicy Issues

(S//SI) During the incident, a number of customers asked to see the transcript of
the conversation between the PRC fighter intercept controller and the surviving PRC
F-8-II pilot. This transcript, defined by NSA as raw ' SIGINT, had served as the basis
for a SIGINT product report already issued. Current NSA policy allows for release of
raw SIGINT to customers, in accordance with written procedures.

(C) Uncertainty by NSA officials over whether or not to release the raw SIGINT
ultimately led to a request for guidance from the Secretary of Defense on how NSA
should handle the requ ests for this information. The guidance provided was to limit
sharing of this information to select senior officials at the Pentagon and CIA, and only
under strict handling procedures. Initially, the list did not include the JCS J2, S tate
Department officials, or members of congressional oversight committees, though the

Deputy S ecretary of State and JCS J2 were added later. The Chairman of the House
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, who had specifically requested the
transcript, was not added. These actions frustrated customers and oversight officials, and
fostered a perception that NSA was holding back key intelligence.

(C) NSA's S ignals Intelligence Directorate is reviewing and revising its policy on
raw SIGINT. Thi s review was underway prior to the EP-3E incident. The EP-3E

incident highlighted misunderstandings within the U.S. Cryptologic System regarding
providing raw SIGINT to customers. F or example, some managers had a false
impression that the requests for raw SIGINT required legal review when in fact it is a
policy, not a legal issue. Al so, NSA officers in the field differed in their interpretations
of their responsibilities to handle raw SIGINT.

7.7	(U) C

usto mer

Vi

(S//SI) G enerally, SIGINT reporting during the incident received high marks.
Specifically, the ADCI for Collection praised NSA' s efforts against the PRC leadership
target during negotiations for the EP-3E' s crew release. Al so, the CRITIC reporting
series was valuable to customers.

(S//SI) Customer expectations during a crisis such as this are subject to change,
usually without notice. Immediately following the collision, many customers adjusted
their information threshold. Data previously deemed insignificant, e.g., routine PRC
transport flights in and around Lingshui airfield, quickly became unique and critical to
many customers. During this crisis customers expected to be informed of what the U.S.
Cryptologic System knew, what it did not know, and any additional insight, even that
which would not be reported. This was deemed critical by Intelligence Community
analy sts for policymaker support.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
40

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

7.8	(U) C rew Debriefing P rocedures

(S) T he Joint P ersonnel Recovery Agency (JPRA), part of the Joint Forces
Command, is the lead organization chartered with the safe and efficient repatriation of
U.S. military personnel, and in some cases, U.S. civilians and other individuals. JPRA
conducted non-intelligence related debriefings of the crew and advised and trained the
intelligence debriefing teams.

(S) Following their 11 -day detention, the repatriated crew was immediately made
available for JPRA and intelligence debriefings in Hawaii. Six three-person debriefing
teams were formed to debrief the 24 crew members regarding intelligence loss and
compromise. Each team consisted of a representative from either the Defense HUMINT
Service or Naval Criminal Investigative Service, a Navy representative with EP-3E flight
experience, and an NSA subject matter expert.

(S) The CINCP ACF LT Director of Intelligence (N2) and Director for Cryptology
(N3DC) were responsible for forming the intelligence debriefing teams and developing
the methodology and questions required to assess the potential intelligence loss from this

incident. CINCPACFLT N2 prepared a CONOP without benefit of written guidelines.

(S) The time allotted for the initial debriefings was too short and the period
between the initial intelligence debriefings and follow-up re-interviews was too long.

JPRA guidance recommended at least 72 hours to complete both the JPRA and
intelligence debriefs. Due to the decision to release the crew for the Easter holiday, this
time was reduced to 42 hours. F urthermore, the crew was not available for follow-up
debriefings for over 30 days. During this time, the crew's recall of events was affected by
numerous events and interactions. By the time of their Maryland re-interviews, accuracy
of the individual accounts of events had degraded. While we assess that in this case the
overall accuracy of our findings was not impacted, it easily could have been had the PRC
not returned certain equipments (e.g., the MARTES i a ptop and SCARAB computer). In
order to increase the accuracy of future damage assessments, the intelligence debriefing
process must be allowed sufficient time and be completed as soon as possible after such a
compromise.

7.9	(U) Damage Assess ment P rocedures

(S) Although the potential damage to U.S. intelligence capabilities was an
issue from the outset, the EP-3 Cryptologic Assessment Team was not established until
26 days after the incident. In hindsight, it should have been formed immediate ly. The
team did not identify any guidance documents or directives for conducting an intelligence
compromise damage assessment.

7.10

\ecom mendations

(U) R

• (U//FOUO) Impl

ement streamlined

NSA

policy regarding

raw SIGINT

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
41

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1











•

•

(U//FOUO) T he Secretary of Defense in coordination with the DCI should
charter a damage assessment team within 48 hours of a potential intelligence
compromise involving DoD assets. The team should serve as the lead for
producing findings, the damage assessment, and recommendations,

(U//FOUO) I mplement procedures to increase the SIGINT system's

responsiveness during crisis events.

(C) Ti e the monitoring of international distress frequencies to specific

NICKELBACK ad visory conditions.

(U//FOUO) Ac quire a record and playback capability immediately for all
Pacific Tributary Network (PTN) broadcasts at the KRSOC.

(U//FOUO) Ai lot sufficient time for intelligence debriefings in order to allow
a thorough determination of potentially compromised data.

(U//FOUO) Incorporate intelligence debriefing into JPRA personnel recovery
procedures if there is an Intelligence Community equity.

(U//FOUO) T he Secretary of Defense and the DCI jointly prepare a damage
assessment how to guide for intelligence compromises.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
42

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

8.0

8.1

(U) E,

i ergency

P

r o cesses a n

d P

rocedures

(U) Key F indings

(U//FOUO) No specific guidance existed regarding Mission Commander or
aircrew actions should an SRO aircraft be forced or, through emergency, be
required to land in the PRC.

(C) A substantial amount of non-mission-essential classified information was
carried onboard the aircraft.

(C) Inventory procedures did not require sufficient detail to identify reliably
the content of classified equipments, computers, or hardcopy materials.

(C) Crew training for emergency destruction was minimal and did not meet
squadron requirements; this deficiency was the primary cause of the
compromise of classified material.

(C) There was sufficient time to jettison all sensitive materials from the
aircraft.











8.1.1

(U)

ntrod u ction

(U) This section reviews emergency processes and procedures that applied to the
EP-3E mission. It reviews policy, radio communications, internal communications,
classification and material handling, emergency destruction policy, procedures, and
training, and crew reaction. It also includes a discussion of procedures employed by other

tactical SIGINT platforms. For reference, a schematic of the EP-3E with position
identifications is included in Appendix F.

8.2	(U) Policy

8.2.1	(U) Findings

(U//FOUO) There was no policy guidance regarding actions to be taken in the
event of hazardous maneuvers by reacting PRC fighter aircraft.

(U//FOUO) F aced with hazardous PRC fighter maneuvers, several of the crew
remained out of their seats.

(C) T he M ission Commander, although in communication with the Pacific
Reconnaissance Operations Center after landing at Lingshui Airfield, did not
request instructions or guidance from higher authority.

(U//FOUO) Peacetime detention training was optional for Navy aircrew; nine
of the EP-3E crew members had not received the training.

8.2.2

(U) D

iscussion

(S) PRC fighter reactions to SRO missions in the South China Sea, specifically
those by Lingshui-based fighters, had become increasingly aggressive in the months
preceding the collision incident. Reacting aircraft frequently approached to within 100
feet of the mission aircraft, and on four occasions, within 50 feet. Th e closest previous









TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
43

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

approach was within ten feet. The U.S. government was aware of the potential hazards
imposed by such activity and delivered a demarche on the topic to B eijing in D ecember
2000. H owever, neither the Pacific Command nor the JCS issued any new guidance
regarding actions to be taken in the event of close encounters by reacting PRC fighter
aircraft. At the time of the collision, several crew members were out of their seats.
Though crew members were not injured, they could have been and this could have made
a difficult situation far worse.

(S) SRO flight crews operating in the P acific theater lacked specific guidance on
divert airfields under emergency conditions. There were no written policies or
procedures that specified countries to which the aircraft could or could not divert under
emergency situations, crew actions to be taken in the event of emergency dive rts,
contingency statements for crew use, specific instructions regarding disposition of
materials, or whether or not the aircraft should be destroyed, and if so, how.

(S) After th

e collision, the

Mi

ssion

Commander assessed his ability to fly the

aircraft, the airworthiness of the aircraft, and the options available (i.e., bailout, ditch,
land). The M ission Commander elected to divert to the closest airfield, at Lingshui on
Hainan Island. Once the aircraft had landed, a cadre of PRC military, some of whom

were armed with bolt-action rifles, almost immediately surrounded it, though none aimed
weapons at the aircraft. Based on his assessment of growing PRC impatience, the
M ission Commander ordered the plane powered down, thereby terminating
communications with the Pacific Reconnaissance Operations Center, and ordered the

crew to deplane.

(S) T he PRC detained the crew for 11 days. Nine of the crew, including the
M ission Commander, had not received peacetime detention training. Thi s training
addresses the legal rights and responsibilities of aircrews facing precisely the
circumstances this crew encountered and provides methods and techniques for dealing
with detention, interrogation, and isolation. A review of the crews detention experience
is contained in a separate report issued by the Joint P ersonnel Recovery Agency.

(S) A bilateral agreement with Russia establishes procedures for the peaceful
handling and expeditious resolution of similar incidents between U.S. and Russian forces.
The Agreement Between the United States and Russia on the Prevention of Dangerous
Military Activities specifies procedures for both parties in the event of distress (force
majeure) entry of U.S. forces into Russian territory. U.S. aircrews (including the incident
EP-3E crew) carry specific guidance in their Flight Information Handbook covering the
implementation of this agreement. This guidance includes frequencies, call signs,
standard phraseology and a Russian language checklist for use after landing. No similar
agreement exists between the U.S. and the PRC.

8.2.3

(U) R

ecom mendations

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
44

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(C) Establish written guidance for aircrew actions in the event of hazardous
maneuvers by reacting fighters.

(C) Provide detailed guidance for Mission Commander and crew actions in
the event of a forced landing of the mission aircraft in countries within range
of the mission track.

(U//FOUO) Require peacetime detention training for all reconnaissance
personnel and personnel engaged in other sensitive operations where there is a
risk of detention.

(U//FOUO) Explore pursuing an agreement with the PRC to establish joint
procedures to prevent dangerous military activities.

8.3	(U) Radio C

8.3.1	(U) Find

om m unications

8.3.2

(C) The flight crew defaulted to U.S. military emergency communications
procedures that were ineffective in establishing contact with the PRC.

(C) The flight crew was unfamiliar with PRC aeronautical frequency usage
and did not attempt contact with Lingshui on local airfield frequencies.

(C) Emergency destruction efforts directed at communications equipment
placed the aircrew out of radio contact until after landing. At that time, the
aircrew briefly restored secure communications with PACROC until
terminating connectivity prior to deplaning.

(U) R adio Equipment and Networks

(U//FOUO) The EP-3E has numerous radios onboard and is a participant on a
wide variety of radio networks. Line-of-sight communications are conducted using both
plain voice and secure VHF and UHF radios. On SRO missions, long-range
communications with controlling authorities are conducted via HF radio and over a
number of secure UHF satellite networks. F or a listing of EP-3E radio equipment and
networks, see Appendix E.

8.3.3

(U) Em

mergency Communications

(U) U nited States and allied military aviation communications take place almost

entirely within the frequency band from 225.0 MH z to 399.9 MHz. U.S. military pilots
receive the majority of their training in this band, including the use of the 243.0 MHz
emergency frequency. EP-3E flight station radios have an emergency setting that tunes

directly to 243.0 MHz.

(C) D o D Fi ight Information P ublications carried onboard the EP-3E list several
international emergency frequencies, including both 121.5 MHz and 243.0 MHz, and

state in general that any may be used. No guidance is provided specific to emergency
contact with the PRC.









n gs







TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
45

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

8.3.4

(U) P rocedures Used D

d D uring Incident

(S) A. the time of the incident, secure communications via satellite had been

established with KRSOC and the Special Support Acti vity (SSA) in NSOC on the Pacific
Tributary Network (PTN), and with KRSOC on the SENSOR PACER network. HF

reception and connectivity using the Global High F requency System (GHFS) was poor.

(S) In the first moments after the collision, the secure communications operator
attempted repeatedly to transmit the two-word message "GOING DOWN" on the
SENSOR PACER network. This message was never received. Further transmissions
were precluded by the emergency destruction of secure communications equipment.

one transmission

was recei

(S) The navigator transmitted MAYDAY calls on PTN. At least
ived by both KRSOC and SSA, initiating CRITIC reporting. The navigator also
transmitted MAYDAY calls on the GHFS frequency of 13200 kHz. Th ese calls were

never received.

(S//SI) The aircrew transmitted repeated MAYDAY calls on the UHF emergency
frequency 243.0 MHz. At no time did the aircrew transmit on the VHF emergency
frequency of 121.5 MHz or any frequency associated with Lingshui Airfield. Training of
flight station personnel did not address either the PRC usage of the VHF band for
military aircraft communications or PRC emergency communications procedures.

Efforts to locate Lingshui Airfield frequencies in DoD flight information publications
were unsuccessful, since PRC military airfields are not listed. COMINT operators on the
aircraft were familiar with the Lingshui Airfield frequency (128.5 MHz) and PRC -wide
military aviation frequencies (126.0 and 130.0 MH z), but the flight station did not engage
the COMINT operators on this issue.

(S) P ower was removed from the PTN satellite voice radio during the emergency
destruction process, erasing all frequencies from the radios memory. Alth ough the crew
destroyed the radio's cryptographic keying material and PTN frequency documentation, it
did not zeroize the radio s encryption device.

(S) After landing, the SEVAL was able to recall the PTN frequency and retune
the radio, enabling the crew to re-establish secure two-way communications with the

Pacific Reconnaissance Operations Center (PACROC), KRSOC, and Special Support
Acti vity (SSA) . The crew then transmitted the final message from the aircraft before
zeroizing the PTN radio's encryption device.

8.3.5

(U)

Recommendations

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
46

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

8.4

8.4.1

•	(U//FOUO) Incorporate guidance in emergency destruction procedures
identifying communication equipment that should not be zeroized or
destroyed until no longer needed.

•	(U//FOUO) Train flight crew personnel in the emergency communication
procedures used by countries in their areas of operations.

•	(U//FOUO) Provide guidance in the Do D Fl ight Information Handbook
specific to emergency communications with the PRC and other target nations.

(U) Internal Communications
(U) F indings

(C) A breakdown in communications and situational awareness occurred
throughout the aircraft immediately following the collision.

(C) P ublic address (PA) announcements were nearly unintelligible in the noisy
environment afte r the collision; many crew members reported an inability to
clearly understand PA commands once they had donned helmets.

(C) The inabili ty to effectively communicate orders and intentions contributed
significantly to the incomplete destruction effort.

(C) The decision to land instead of ditching the aircraft was not communicated
to the entire crew.

8.4.2

(U) Internal C

ommun

cation System

(C) T he EP-3E's internal communications system is the D igital C ommunications
M anagement System (DCMS). Am operational crew positions have access to the DCMS
with headsets, with the exception of personnel in the galley and observers in the flight
station. Communication paths between crew members are divided into various audio
networks. The primary network is the ALL net (available at all crew stations). An
internal PA system, consisting of small loudspeakers distributed throughout the aircraft
cabin, is available for internal announcements. PA system announcements override
DCMS traffic at every crew station. Helmets can be connected to the DCMS using the
same cable that connects headsets. Helmets are tight-fitting and acoustically isolate the
wearer from his or her surroundings.

8.4.3

(U) No

Mi

C

ssion Communications

(S) There is no specific written guidance on DCMS net configuration or
employment. During periods of heightened activity, such as when the aircraft is being
intercepted, the entire crew usually switches to the ALL net to maximize their situational
awareness. In the case of an intercept, this allows all personnel to hear observer reports
on the intercepting aircraft. As an exception to this practice, the COMINT operators
monitoring target nation communications may deselect the ALL net to
distraction and interference.

minimize

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
47









TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(U//FOUO) During emergencies, the SEVAL serves as the point of contact
between the Aircraft Commander in the flight station and the crew, orchestrating the safe
completion of emergency procedures. Th e flight station also communicates to the crew
aft using the PA system.

(U//FOUO) It was not a procedural requirement for all EP-3E crew members to
monitor DCMS during landings.

8.4.4

(U) P rocedures Used D

d D uring Incident

(S) At the time of the intercept, several crew members were not connected to the
DCMS. Th ese included a third pilot and second flight engineer acting as observers in the
flight station, a roving photographer, and an ELINT operator trainee. All other crew
members were monitoring the ALL net with the exception of COMINT operators
engaged in collection.

(C) After the collision, the first command issued by the M ission Commander was
to prepare to bail out. This command was issued via the PA. Am crew members removed
their headsets in order to don their parachutes, survival vests and helmets.

(C) H igh noise levels resulting from aircraft damage gave crew members wearing
helmets great difficulty hearing each other, even when shouting at close range. PA
announcements were also difficult to hear. At this point, communication of orders and
instructions to the crew became unreliable.

(C) Acting as jumpmaster, the SEVAL connected his helmet to a DCMS interface
but was unable to communicate with the flight station due to a failed microphone.
Consequently, he sent a runner to the cockpit to inform the M ission Commander that the
crew was prepared to bail out.

(C) After issuing the command to prepare to bail out, the M ission Commander
regained control of the ai rcraft, negating the need to bail out. The M ission Commander
then issued a PA announcement notifying the crew to prepare to ditch and to commence
emergency destruction.

(C) As emergency destruction began, crew members aft of the navigation station
did not connect their helmets to the DCMS in order to have free movement for
destruction activity. As a result, no one heard flight station discussions on the ALL net
concerning landing at Lingshui. Alth ough the M ission Commander did not make a PA
announcement regarding the decision to attempt landing at Lingshui, the SEVAL did
learn of the intention through face-to-face communication with the M ission Commander.
However, he did not communicate this information to the rest of the crew.

(C) Only after strapping themselves in for the expected ditching did some
personnel connect their helmets to the DCMS. S ome crew members cited difficulty
doing so due to tangled cords or unfamiliarity with the helmet DCMS cable connection.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
48

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Oth ers had taken assigned ditching stations in the galley, and had no DCMS access. As a
result, many crew members did not realize the aircraft was landing instead of ditching
until they either saw land out a window or heard the landing gear deploy.

8.4.5

(U) R

ecom mendations

•	(U//FOUO) Improve the performance and intelligibility of the EP-3E PA

system to operate better in all environments.

•	(U//FOUO) Increase training using helmets during drills so that crew
members are proficient at communicating while wearing helmets.

•	(U//FOUO) Reemphasize the critical role of clear communications between
the flight station and aircrew cabin during emergency procedure and Aircrew
Coordination Training.

•	(U//FOUO) Drill emergency crew communications procedures in-flight on a
routine basis, practicing alternate communication methods for all
combinations of emergencies.

•	(U//FOUO) As a required part of pre-mission briefings, identify by name key
personnel and alternates responsible for leading crew actions and making
status reports during emergency destruction.

•	(U//FOUO) Design and implement improved emergency communications
procedures and hardware on the EP-3E to enable reliable communications at
all times, especially during abnormal flight conditions. Investigate wireless
communications systems.

8.5	(U) Cl assified and Sensitive M aterial I Handling

8.5.1

(U) Find,

ngs

8.5.2

(C//SI) Standard operating procedures did not restrict the amount of classified
information that could be brought onboard the EP-3E.

(C//SI) The M ission Commander was unaware of and did not specifically
approve any Category III COMINT materials carried onboard.

(C) The inventory left by the mission aircraft prior to departing on the mission
was not accurate, detailed, or verified.

(C) Operational information such as radio call signs and networks was
compromised.

(U) Policy Di

rectives

(U//FOUO) Basic guidance for security procedures for COMINT materials for
airborne SIGINT platforms is set forth in USSID 3 , Cryptologic Security Procedures.

(C//SI) USSID 3 details COMINT restrictions for airborne SIGINT platforms.
The USSID specifies that material up to and including Category III (T op Secret)
COMINT may be brought onboard, but a designee must review the material to determine
whether it applies to the specific mission. USSID 3 further requires that ground

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
49









TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

personnel conduct an inventory of all COMINT material prior to its being placed onboard
the platform, and that ground personnel retain a copy of the inventory.

8.5.3

(U) EP-3E Proced,

(C) Standard operating procedures did not restrict the amount of classified
information that could be brought onboard the aircraft.

(C) Considerable operator training takes place airborne during missions. Such
training is conducted on a not-to-interfere basis, usually during transit to and from the
operational area. M aterial carried onboard to support training included classified
publications and individualized study guides containing target nation orders of battle,
notes on signal and weapons systems employment, and SIGINT reporting procedures.

(C) M ission classified material inventories contain a list of publications and
positional technical working aids by title, individual study guides, electronic media and
portable equipments. This inventory does not include a complete listing of files stored on
disks or computer hard drives, or detailed information on contents, sources, and extracts
contained in the positional working aids.

8.5.4

(U) P re_flight P rocedi

(C) The aircrew produced a classified material inventory and left it with ground
support personnel in Okinawa. However, the inventory was incomplete and not of
sufficient detail to allow a detailed reconstruction of materials carried onboard. Some
classified materials were not known to have been onboard until the aircraft was
recovered.

(C) The aircrew did not limit classified material to that necessary for the conduct
of the mission. Technical working aids contained material covering Russia, North Korea,
India, and the Persian Gulf, as well as intelligence on the PRC not relevant to the
mission. Add itionally, the crew carried substantial training materials and study aids not
required for the mission.

(C) Portable computers contained extensive classified material that was neither
inventoried nor necessary for the mission. Some such material was included in classified
software distributions, some was loaded for in-flight reference, and some was
unintentionally and unknowingly loaded onto hard drives. Still more material had been
generated during or in support of previous missions, but not removed. F or material that
had been removed but was not overwritten, recoverable fragments of deleted files likely
remained. In most cases, the detail and scope of classified material stored on portable
computers was unknown to both the aircrew and ground support personnel.

(C) Personnel most responsible for classified material handling had an insufficient
understanding of their responsibilities. In particular, the M ission Commander, SEVAL,
and COMEVAL had incomplete knowledge of the nature, content and amount of

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
50

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

classified material on the aircraft. Additionally, individual operators were not
knowledgeable of the scope and contents of files contained on electronic media, or the
detailed contents of study guides.

8.5.5

(U) C

ompromise

d Operational Information

(C) Several radio call signs and networks and other operational information were
compromised by documentation left onboard the aircraft. Information included network
names, employment, frequencies; cryptographic keying material assignments; and SRO
track coordinates. Damage from this compromise is low.

(C) Additionally, extensive personnel information was carried onboard by the

Section 6.5, C ounterintelligence Issues).

crew (see

8.5.6

8.6

8.6.1

8.6.2

(U) R

ecom mendations

•	(C) E nsure the M ission Commander and other personnel responsible for
emergency destruction are fully cognizant of the scope and nature of all
classified materials onboard the aircraft and are in compliance with USSID 3.

•	(C) R eview USSID 3 requirements for the protection of COMINT systems

and data at all classification levels.

•	(U//FOUO) Issue policy to increase the detail in material inventories to
support a rapid and accurate page-for-page reconstruction of all sensitive and
classified materials, including all files on hard disks, CD ROMs, and floppy
disks.

•	(U//FOUO) Ma intain exact backup copies of all electronic media at a ground
support facility for every mission.

•	(U/FOUO) Establish written procedures designating specific ground support
personnel who will verify aircraft inventories and electronic media backups
prior to every mission.

•	(C) Review and change, as required, compromised operational information
such as radio call signs and frequencies.

(U) E mergency Destruction Policy, P rocedures, and Training

(U) F indings

•	(C) No specific guidance regarding emergency destruction techniques was

provided by SSO N avy or NSA.

•	(C) An inventory of destroyed materials and equipments was not kept.

(U) P

olicy

(U//FOUO) Basic policy for emergency destruction of cryptologic materials is set

forth in USSID 3 , Cryptologic Security Procedures, USSID 702, 0 utomated Information
System s Security, NSA/CSS Manual 130-2, Media Declassification and Destruction

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
51

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Ma nual, and DCID 1/21, Phys ical Security Standards for Sensitive Compartmented

~ acilities.

(C//SI) USSID 3 states that any emergency destruction that renders classified
material and systems unusable is sufficient, but provides no guidance regarding suitable

techniques. USSID 702 promulgates NSA/CSS Manual 130-2, which provides a

thorough and technical discussion of procedures for the routine sanitization and
declassification of electronic media and for its end-of- life destruction, but does not
identify suitable emergency procedures. DCID 1/21 establishes security standards for
sensitive compartmented information (SCI). F or aircraft, the DCID states that if a
landing in unfriendly territory is anticipated, all SCI material will immediately be
destroyed, but does not specify procedures or techniques. DCID 1/21 mandates
emergency destruction rehearsal, but conditions requiring such rehearsal are ambiguous.

(U//FOUO) Although various Navy directives mandate the existence of
emergency action plans, no current Navy directive or publication provides guidance
specific to the implementation of emergency destruction procedures.

(C) There is no unifying concept underlying any of the guidance regarding

emergency destruction. This issue is discussed in detail in Section 4.4, SIGINT
Configuration and Materials M anagement.

8.6.3

(U) EP-3E P rocedures and T

raining

(C) Squadron requirements and procedures for emergency destruction are set forth
in the instruction VQ-1 C ommand Emergency Action Plan (EAP). Th is official directive
requires emergency destruction to take place if an aircraft is to land in hostile territory or
ditch in less than 6000 feet of water. If the aircraft is expected to ditch in more than 6000
feet of water, all classified materials should be permitted to go down with the aircraft.

(C) T he instruction details duties for individual crew members. A separate
checklist page, intended to be detached and referenced during emergency destruction, is
included for each affected crew member. Oth er than shredding, tearing, jettisoning and
striking with an axe, no destruction techniques are specified.

(U//FOUO) F inal responsibility for emergency destruction lies with the M ission
Commander. The instruction explicitly caveats that emergency destruction is secondary
to aircrew safety.

(U//FOUO) The squadron emergency action plan specifies that all squadron
personnel receive emergency action plan training. Aircrews are required to incorporate
emergency destruction plans and practice drills into predeployment workups and to
conduct an emergency destruction drill at least once while deployed.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
52

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(U//FOUO) VQ-1 crews and NSG COMINT operators train separately.

P redeployment workups and training for VQ-1 take place in the United States, while
NSG COMINT operators train in Japan.

(C) At the time of the incident, the EP-3E was not equipped with shredders or
other destruction tools. The aircrafts fire axe, a dull hatchet approximately 16 inches
long intended for cutting through bulkheads in an emergency evacuation, was used in
destruction attempts.

8.6.4

(U) P rocedures Used D

d D uring Incident

one crew

(C) Emergency destruction training for the aircrew was minimal. Only
member reported ever having participated in an in-flight emergency destruction drill.
Fifteen reported having been exposed to emergency destruction procedures in the course
of their training without the benefit of drills or walk-throughs. Eight reported no training
whatsoever. None had trained for emergency destruction in conjunction with any aircraft
emergency. A review of crew training records revealed no documentation other than
individual JQR signatures of any emergency destruction training or drills. Training was
lackadaisical, with the aircrew generally unengaged and going through the motions using
unrealistic scenarios.

(C) The squadron emergency action plan, including crew checklists, was carried
onboard the aircraft, but not consulted during the incident. Emergency destruction efforts
that took place did not resemble prescribed procedures.

(C) Emergency destruction procedures did not begin until several minutes after
the collision. Th e crew initially focused on preparing to bail out. Only after regaining
control of the aircraft did the pilot instruct the crew to prepare to ditch and commence
emergency destruction. M any crew members did not hear the PA announcement, but
began emergency destruction based on the actions of others around them.

(C) At this point, no crew member aft of the navigation station was connected to
the DCMS, so no one person was in a position to oversee and coordinate emergency
destruction. As a result, crew activities divided themselves into three independent areas
of action: the flight station, including the secure communications operator and navigator;

the ELINT operators, including the SEVAL; and the COMINT operators, including the

COMEVAL.

(C) The pilots, flight engineers, and navigator were immersed in recovering and
maintaining control of the aircraft. Classified and unclassified documents were hurriedly
grabbed and passed aft for destruction in an uncoordinated fashion, resulting in the pilots'
emergency checklists being removed and destroyed. The navigator gathered some
classified documentation and most cryptographic material into the CMS box before it was
taken from her and used to batter equipment. Off -duty flight station personnel, believing
that ditching was imminent, proceeded to their ditching stations in the galley and did not
participate in emergency destruction in any significant way.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
53

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(C) ELINT personnel were unfamiliar with emergency destruction procedures, but
proceeded using their best judgment. Operators packed classified material into satchels
in preparation for jettisoning, zeroized installed ELINT equipment and computer systems,
and physically battered exposed equipment.

(C) T he aircrafts fire axe was aggressively employed in attempts to destroy the
three ELINT laptop computers. This technique is estimated to have been effective in
destroying the hard drive of one laptop, but the other two laptop hard drives are assessed
to have survived destruction attempts due in part to operator unfamiliarity with how best
to destroy them. Two of the three laptops, including the destroyed laptop, were
eventually jettisoned.

(C) Operators also attempted destruction of installed ELINT equipment. W ithout
guidance on how to proceed, they directed the bulk of their efforts toward the relatively
fragile displays and controls most accessible at their consoles. W hile many such units
were damaged beyond usability, critical system components such as tuners and signal
processors went unscathed due to their rugged construction and relative inaccessibility.
Improvised destruction tools included the aluminum CMS box, which sprung open and
scattered cryptographic material while being used to smash equipment. Time was wasted
gathering and repacking this material.

(C) Jettisoning took place through the starboard overwing hatch. After the hatch
was opened, the SEVAL threw materials from the aircraft as three crew members
restrained him from being sucked through the opening. Some ELINT documentation,
two of the three ELINT laptops, magnetic data tapes, and miscellaneous materials such as
binders and keyboards were jettisoned before the hatch was closed. The CMS box
containing cryptographic keying material and miscellaneous classified documents was
also jettisoned. The crew was unable to maintain an inventory of jettisoned materials.

(C//SI) COMINT personnel were also unfamiliar with emergency destruction
procedures. Operators gathered classified documents and passed them forward toward
the area of the starboard overwing hatch. ^\t the COMINT S upervisors station, materials
were packed into locking leather satchels for jettisoning, but then stored in a nearby
cabinet in anticipation of ditching.

(C//SI) COMINT portable computers were damaged to varying degrees. The
COMINT S upervisors laptop computer (F igure 4) was struck with an axe. The
SCARAB computer was thrown to the deck in an unsuccessful attempt to damage the
locked'in hard drive. The MARTES i aptop was stowed undamaged in the galley in
anticipation of ditching.

(C) A s the aircraft approached land, the M ission Commander instructed the crew
to take their seats and strap in, effectively ending destruction efforts. After landing,
further destruction efforts were limited to tearing loose papers and tapes and scattering
the resulting material about the aircraft.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
54

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

8.6.5	(U) Recom mendations
•	(U//FOUO) Train aircrew in emergency destruction procedures in a formal
•	setting prior to their operational deployment.  (U//FOUO) Include emergency destruction classroom training and in-flight drills during crew workups. Include all crew members from all commands
•	participating in operations.  (U//FOUO) Require regular emergency destruction drills during detachments; include situations where destruction procedures are impeded by simultaneous emergencies (e.g., fire of unknown origin, preparations to bail out and/or
•	ditch) and constrained by time limits.  (U//FOUO) Include emergency destruction responsibilities and procedures in pre-mission briefings, similar to those for ditching, bailout, and fire of
•	unknown origin.  (U//FOUO) Issue individualized written emergency destruction procedures in
•	a quick-reference format to all crew members prior to flight.  (U//FOUO) Include emergency destruction as a sub-area of all positional  NATOPS qualifications.
•	(U//FOUO) Ensure sufficient type and quantity of emergency destruction
•	tools are onboard mission aircraft.  (U//FOUO) Develop practical procedures for inventorying jettisoned or
•	destroyed materials.  (U//FOUO) Conduct and document periodic emergency destruction reviews to ensure procedures are current with technology and mission environment
•	changes.  (U//FOUO) F or any equipment not covered by current emergency destruction procedures, require new procedures and training before allowing the
•	equipment onboard.  (U//FOUO) Provide national-level guidance for jettisoning classified  mate rials.

rew Reaction

8.7.1	(U) Findings
•	(C) Individual crew performance during the emergency destruction activities
•	ranged from good to poor.  (C) Effective communication among three key officers (the Mission Commander, SEVA L and COMEVA L) after the collision would have
•	improved the outcome of emergency destruction.  (C) A lack of cohesive and unified crew training adversely affected emergency destruction.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
55

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

8.7.2

(U) D

iscussion

(C) The aircrews overall performance in safeguarding classified materials under
their charge was poor. Success where it occurred was the result of the com mon sense
focus of a few individuals in an uncoordinated effort and occurred despite a general lack
of training, practice in emergency destruction, capabilities, and sound policy.

(C) The crews efforts should be viewed in light of the severe environmental and
human factors they faced. In the aftermath of the collision, every crewmember suffered
from some degree of shock. W hile individual performance can then be expected to
suffer, such conditions are not insurmountable. Aggressive, repeated, and thorough
training serves to guide the thoughts and actions of personnel in extremis. The crew's
execution of often-drilled emergency procedures and preparations to bail out were largely
successful. However, a lack of training and practice left the crew unprepared to execute
emergency destruction successfully under these adverse conditions.

(C) T he SEVAL did not oversee the emergency destruction efforts of the crew as
a whole, focusing his attention on the ELINT and COMSEC materials carried onboard by
squadron personnel. The proper disposition of COMINT materials and equipments fell to
the COMEVAL. C iting time constraints, the SEVAL consciously decided not to retrieve

and use the aircraft's copy of the squadron emergency action plan.

(C) T he SEVAL personally wielded the fire axe to destroy laptop computers and
then jettisoned material through the starboard overwing hatch. By actively engaging in
this activity instead of delegating it to other personnel, he isolated himself from
knowledge of actions taking place in the rest of the cabin. As a result, he had no
situational awareness of the status and scope of emergency destruction and was unable to
effectively monitor and direct the actions of the crew.

(C) Although the SEVAL learned of the M ission Commanders intent to attempt
to land the aircraft at Lingshui through face-to-face communication, he did not
communicate this to the rest of the crew in general or to the COMEVAL in particular.

(C) T he COMEVAL did not ascertain or maintain situational awareness of the

aircraft’s circumstances and Mission Commander’s intentions. Assuming that the aircraft

was going to ditch, the COMEVAL elected not to jettison classified material. This
decision was not coordinated with the SEVAL or the M ission Commander. As a result,
the COMEVAL was unsuccessful in meeting the responsibility to ensure destruction of
sensitive classified material.

(C) Several personnel, observing COMINT materials being packed and placed in
a storage cabinet, were concerned that this material should instead be jettisoned. None
took the initiative to assert their concerns to the COMEVAL.

(C) After landing, the COMEVAL did not communicate to the SEVAL or the

M ission Commander that all COMINT materials and carry-on equipments were still

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
56

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

onboard. Several crew members, also knowing that substantial amounts of classified
material remained onboard, similarly failed to raise the issue to their chain of command.

(C) T he M ission Commander and SEVAL assumed that emergency destruction
efforts were complete. They neither queried the crew to verify the disposition of
classified materials nor directed or conducted any form of sweep or search of the aircraft.
As he left the aircraft, the M ission Commander assumed that all classified materials had
been destroyed or jettisoned and that only scraps of paper and destroyed equipment
remained.

(C) T he M ission Commander, concerned about the apparent growing impatience
of the PRC troops surrounding the aircraft, terminated secure radio communications with
PACROC before PACOM authorities could be summoned. He ordered the crew to
deplane, placing the crew and the aircraft in PRC control.

(C) During debriefings, many crew members commented on the lack of training
as a crew. There was a common view that the coordination and effortlessness that marks
outsta nding crews is difficult to achieve since training and preparation for the deployment
occur separately, the responsibility of tw o different commands. F requently, the entire
crew for the mission aircraft does not meet as a unit until the first mission of the
deployment.

(C) In this case, the crew was not properly organized and trained in preparation
for executing emergency destruction of classified material as required by the squadron
emergency action plan. Emergency destruction plans and practice drills were not
incorporated into aircrew predeployment workups, and no emergency destruction training
or drills had been conducted during the deployment.

(C) While required training of the crew would have improved the outcome of this

incident, greater crew experience also would have added to the crew’s likelihood of

success. A few of the enlisted operators had multiple tours and thousands of hours of
experience conducting SRO missions. All of the officers in leadership positions were
relatively inexperienced (both the M ission Commander and the SEVAL were on their
first deployment in these positions) and all were in their first tours conducting SRO
missions on this platform. There was one Senior Chief P etty Offi cer and one F irst Class
P etty Offi cer onboard. All other enlisted personnel were E5 or junior.

8.7.3

(U) R

ecom mendations

(U//FOUO) Review and formalize crew certification procedures for each
deploying crew. Include demonstrated ability to execute all emergency
procedures satisfactorily, and emergency destruction under less than optimal
conditions.

(U//FOUO) As part of individual qualification, require trainees to exercise and
demonstrate proper emergency destruction procedures during in-flight
examination.





TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
57

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

• (U//FOUO) Examine current organizations with the objective of aligning crew
training, cohesion, unity, and overall experience.

8.8	(U) Other Tactical SIGINT P latforms

(U//FOUO) Team members deployed to several locations to gather data on best
practices in use on other tactical SIGINT collection platforms. Th e visits concentrated on
gaining insights into procedures for risk management in the day-to-day conduct of
tactical intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance missions. Appendix G contains a
complete list of units visited and discussion of procedures used for various platforms.

(U//FOUO) G enerally, other tactical SIGINT platforms have processes and
procedures similar to the EP-3E, including emergency destruction and training, as well as
requirements for control of classified and sensitive equipments and documentation.
Assuming the destruction plans are technically appropriate for the materials onboard,
crew training and drilling will be the deciding factor in successful emergency destruction.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
58

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

9.0	(U) System ic Issues

9.1	(U) Key Finding

•	(C) The incident revealed a systemic complacency regarding policy, planning,

and training support to EP-3E SRO

missions.

9.2	(U) Di

scuss ion

(C) The detailed research, interviews, and data gathering conducted to evaluate

this incident have brought the crew’s actions, both successful and not, into sharp focus.

It is clear that a better-aligned and trained crew could have substantially mitigated, and
likely completely avoided, the loss of sensitive material through better communication
and more effective action.

(C) Less obvious, but equally as clear, is the systemic complacency of the
organizations charged with supporting these Sensitive Reconnaissance Operations. The
daily reconnaissance flights conducted by aircrews around the world are the final step in
a process that should properly anticipate, plan for, equip, train for, and oversee these
operati ons.

(C) In this case, there was a lack of current guidance regarding a situation that
was growing increasingly hazardous. Alth ough the United States had delivered a
demarche to the PRC in December 2000 declaring its concern for the actions of the PRC
pilots, this concern was not translated by theater- and Washington-level organizations
into specific issuance of updated guidance to aircrews.

(S) There was no guidance to the Navy aircrew regarding procedures to be
followed should the SRO aircraft be forced by circumstances to land in a target country.
In this case, the relatively junior officer in charge of the mission was left to make his best
estimate of the correct response. Guidance to crews should be developed and frequently
reviewed to ensure the most appropriate response, should a platform be forced to recover
in a potentially unfriendly location. Alth ough not a factor in this case, the Navy aircrew
was not required to complete peacetime detention training, leaving them less well
prepared to deal with the circumstances in which they found themselves.

(C) That the crew was untrained and untested in emergency destruction speaks
directly to the process by which the providing commands, in this case VQ-1 and NSGA
M isawa, prepared and certified the crew for deployment. Acti ve command oversight of
training by experienced, knowledgeable personnel is a prerequisite for success. Review
of the procedures by which crews prepare technical materials for onboard support,
inventory those materials, and train for their destruction or protection is a fundamental
command responsibility. Commander, Naval Security Group Command and the
Commanders of Patrol and Reconnaissance Forces should vigorously review and assess
these procedures on a regular basis.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
59

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(U) It ; s routine for aircrews to be comprised of personnel from multiple
commands, given the range of technical skills and experience needed to successfully
meet the complex requirements set for most crews. This places a special burden on
providing commands to ensure that crews are trained to the highest state of preparedness.

If manning and training cannot be accomplished within the commands’ resources (e.g.,

flight hours available for in-flight emergency destruction training, travel funds for
Aircrew Coordination Training), the organizations charged with resourcing those
commands must engage and resolve the issue.

(C) Policy for emergency destruction is inadequate and does not account for

today’s rapidly evolving technologies and the equipments and capabilities being routinely

deployed in risky environments. DCI and DIRNSA guidance addresses the requirements
for end-state destruction in rigorous detail, but does not address destruction in emergency
circumstances, other than to direct that it be accomplished.

(S) New guidance is required that incorporates modern methods of data protection
or eradication. Increasingly, our capabilities are not embedded in hardware but reside in
software. The U.S. requires a response that changes the paradigm from destruction of
equipments and materials to safeguarding information with modern techniques such as
encryption and rapid overwriting of hard disks. W hile destruction may always be
preferred, it may not always be possible. Several Intelligence Community organizations
are currently working on such applications and have deployed these capabilities on a
limited scale. These efforts should be crosswalked, melded into a coherent program, and
migrated into operational platforms and missions. This is imperative given that more
classified and sensitive capability, not less, will find its way into risky environments
where compromise is possible and where destruction is impractical or not possible.

(C) Focused interest and active regard for the protection of classified information
should not have to result from substantial, public losses. Complacency is in itself a risk
factor. At a time when the intelligence and technical superiority enjoyed by the United
States is challenged, we can ill afford to risk this superiority through inattention to the
protection of what we do have. The protection of classified information should be on a
par with any other emergency procedure that we must be proficient in. This incident has,
to this point, energized the Intelligence Community and many actions have already been
taken to correct deficiencies. However, follow-through and institutionalization of lessons
learned, at all levels, are required to avoid the tendency for loss of focus as incidents
recede, memories fade, and emergent issues strain resources. Failure to address these
issues decisively will not just continue the likelihood of future losses, it will guarantee it.

9.3	(U) R ecom mendation

•	(U) Implement, track, and institutionalize the study s recommendations.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
60

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(U) Glossary

Term	Expansion	Definition/Descri ption
ADCI	Assistant Director of Central Intelligence	n /a
AN/ALD-9	n /a	(U) A direction finder set that calculates the direction of arrival for received HF, VHF, and UHF signals. Installed on the EP~3E.
AN/ALQ-108	n /a	(U) An enemy IFF interrogation system used to actively and passively exploit early Russian IFF and range extension signals. Installed on the EP_3E.
AN/CYZ-10	n /a	(U) The Data Transfer Device currently used in the  U.S. Electronic Key Management Syste m .
AN/ULQ-16	n /a	(U) A computerized pulse processor, used to make radar signal measurements. Installed on the EP_3E.
CINCPAC	Commander'in'Chief, Pacific Command	n /a
CINCPACFLT	Commander'in'Chief, Pacific Fleet	n /a
CMS Box	COMSEC Material System Box	(U) A locking metal case used to secure and transport cryptographic codebooks, keying material and  cryptographic devices on the EP_3E.
COMEVAL	COMINT Evaluator	(C) The senior COMINT authority aboard Naval reconnaissance aircraft. The COMEVAL supervises COMINT collection and provides interface with the ELINT collection effort fo r fused reporting.
COMINT	Communications Intelligence	(U) Technical and intelligence information derived from foreign communications by other than intended  recipients.
COMINT Supervisor	n /a	(C) An experienced enlisted COMINT operator  responsible for monitoring and directing the activities  of the COMINT operators on the EP~3.
COMNAVSECGRU	Commander, Naval Security Group	n /a
COMSEC	Communications Security	(U) Technology for securing/protecting voice/data  communications
COMSEVENTHFLT	Commander, Seventh Fleet	n /a
CRITIC	Critical Information	(U//FOUO) A report of critical information concerning possible foreign threats to U.S. national security that is so significant that it requires the immediate attention of the President and the National Security Council. CRITICs are delivered within 10  minutes to appropriate intelligence organizations, military components, and other recipients as the DCI  may designate.
CTEGM	Collector Technical ELINT  Guidance Manual	(C) NSA collection guidance associated with target emitters and systems of technical interest.
DCI	Director of Central Intelligence	n /a
DCID	Director of Central Intelligence Directive	(U) Directives that serve as the principal means by which the DCI provides guidance, policy, and direction to the Intelligence Community.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
61

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Term	Expansion	Definition/Descri ption
DCMS	Digital Communications Management System	(U//FOUO) The EP-3E internal system that provides  audio communications between crew members as well as routing of audio signals between transmitters, receivers, navigation instruments and the P A sy stem.
DoD	Department of Defense	n /a
DTD	Data Transfer Device	(U) Fill device designed to securely store, transport, and electronically transfer key.
EDP	Emergency Destruction Procedures	(U) Predefined procedures dealing with the destruction of sensitive material (e.g., computers,  documentation, COMSEC keying material).
ELINT	Electronic Intelligence	(U) Technical and intelligence information obtained from the intercept and analysis of non- communication, electromagnetic radiations.
EOB	Electronic Order of Battle	(U) A list of radar sites and the radar sets or systems  that are located at these sites.
EPL	ELINT Parameter Limits	(S) A technical reference document designed, maintained, and promulgated as a national-level guide  to support ELINT collection, signal identification and  signal analysis activities.
FISINT	Foreign Instrumentation Signals Intelligence	(U) Technical and intelligence information derived from intercept of foreign instrumentation signals which include, but are not limited to, telemetry, beaconry, and electronic interrogators.
GHFS	Global High Frequency System	(U//FOUO) A worldwide network of high-power HF radio stations that provide air/ground HF command and control radio communications between ground  agencies and US military aircraft and ships.
HULTEC Database	Hull-to-Emi tter Correlation  Database	(C) A database of information that fingerprints naval platforms by emitter (ELINT) to platform correlation.
HUNTER		(U) U.S. unmanned aerial vehicle
IA	Information Assurance	n /a
IAD	Information Assurance Directorate	n /a
JPRA	Joint Personnel Recovery Agency	(U) The DoD office of primary responsibility for DoD-wide personnel recovery matters.
JQR	Job Qualifications Requirements	(U) P ositional qualification sy ste m that establishes the minimum knowledge and skill level required to  function effectively at a specific watchstation.
KG-84	n /a	(U) A device that provides for encryption and decryption of data traffic.
KL-43	n /a	(U) A portable off-line text encryption/decryption system ruggedized and intended for use in a tactical  environment. Used aboard PACOM SRO aircraft to encrypt short messages for HF transmission.
KLIEGLIGHT	n /a	(U//FOUO) Reporting vehicle used to forward time- sensitive SIGINT technical information to NSOC, SIGINT producers, and Cryptologic Support Groups.
KOI-18	n /a	(U) A small, hand-carried device that reads a standard punched tape and converts the information to a serial output. Used to provide cryptovariables to the KYK- 13 or any other compatible equipment

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
62

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Term	Expansion	Definition/Descri ption
KY-58	n /a	(U) A small device that provides secure voice digital  communications with FM, AM, VHF, and UHF  radios. Designed for mounting in an aircraft  instrument panel or radio console.
KYK-13	n /a	(U) A device that stores cryptovariables for transfer to other equipments.
LUNCHBOX	n /a	(U//FOUO) The unclassified nickname for a U.S.  Navy PROFORMA processor.
MARTES	n /a	(U//FOUO) Unclassified reference to a collection of software tools for collecting, analyzing and processing  signals.
Mission Commander	n /a	(U) An electronic warfare-qualified naval aviator or naval flight officer responsible for all phases of the  assigned mission except for m atters affecting safety of  flight, which remain the exclusive responsibility of the  pilot in command.
NATOPS	Naval Air Training and Operating	(U) A program governing general flight and operating
	Procedures Standard ization	instructions and procedures applicable to the operation  of naval aircraft and related activities.
NICKELBACK	n /a	(U//FOUO) The Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS)  unclassified nickname assigned to COMINT advisory  support.
NOIWON	National Operations and	(U//FOUO) Network of senior watch officers in the
	Intelligence ^Vatch Officers	^Washington area. The NSOC SOO convenes
	Netwo r k	NOIWON conference calls during CRITIC events.
NSG	Naval Security Group	(U) Organization responsible for conducting U.S.  Navy Cryptologic operations.
NSGA	Naval Security Group Activity	(U) Third echelon command under Commander,  Naval Security Group, e.g., NSGA Misawa.  Responsibilities include providing operators in  support of air, surface and subsurface collection  requirements.
NSOC	National Security Operations Center	(U) 7-day/24-hour watch center for U.S. Cryptologic System activities. Director, NSA/CSS command-  and-control center for time-sensitive operations and  focal point for crisis response.
OPNAVINST 3710.7R	Naval Operations Instruction	(U) Chief of Naval Operations instruction that
	3710.7R	promulgates NATOPS General Flight and Operating Instructions
PA	P ublic Ad dress	(U) A system of loudspeakers in the EP-3E, driven by  the DCMS.
PACROC	Pacific Reconnaissance Operations	(U) USCINCPAC coordinating authority for all
	Center	Sensitive Reconnaissance Operations.
PLA	Peoples Liberation Army	(U) The entire PRC Military is contained in the Peoples Liberation Army.
PRC	Peoples Republic of China	n /a
PREDATOR	n /a	(U) U.S. unmanned aerial vehicle
PROFORMA	n /a	(C) Digital command and control data communications that relay information and  instructions to and from radar systems, weapon systems (e.g., surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft artillery, fighter aircraft), and control centers.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
63

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Term	Expansion	Definition/Descri ption
PTN	Pacific Tributary Network	(U//FOUO) A dedicated UHF Satellite  communications net providing 24-hour voice communications support between national and Pacific  theater commands.
RASIN	Radio Signals Notation	(U//FOUO) The COMINT Signal Classification  System for classifying and reporting a wide variety of  signals with their associated parametrics and characteristics.
RSOC	Regional Security Operations  Center	(U) An NSA/CSS operations center that produces SIGINT on a specific region of the world, supporting regional CINCs and warfighters as well as national  decision makers.
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (S&T) OPERATOR	n /a	(U) P osition designation for Station 20 onboard EP- 3E aircraft, normally manned by a Cryptologic Technician Special Signals Operator.
SCARAB	n /a	(U) Commercial name for a ruggedized computer  used for the LUNCHBOX PROFORMA processor. Carried onboard the EP-3E.
SENSOR PACER	n /a	(U//FOUO) Nickname assigned to the secure, digital,  air-ground-air communications system used for  SIGINT reporting and advisory support.
SEVAL	Senior Evaluator	(U) The officer in charge of SIGINT collection operations aboard the EP-3E (Senior Naval Flight Officer)
SOI	Signals Operating Instructions	(U) Target data such as frequencies and call signs that enables communicants to establish and main tain  com munications.
SOO	Senior Operations Officer	(U) At NSA, the SOO is the senior officer on watch at NSOC. Represents DIRNSA afterhours.
SRO	Sensitive Reconnaissance Operation	(U) Airborne and shipborne platforms operating under the Joint Chiefs of Staff Sensitive Reconnaissance Operation program.
SSA	Special Support Activity	(U) At NSA, the SSA is responsible for disseminating time-sensitive, SIGINT-derived threat warning information and coordinating NICKELBACK support to SRO and other reconnaissance operations.
TACREP	Tactical Report	(U//FOUO) SIGINT-derived reporting vehicle used to  provide information on the status of continuing or  potential threats, and other events of high interest.
UAV	Unmanned Aerial Vehicle	n /a
USSID	United States Signals Intelligence Directives	(U//FOUO) The mechanism through which the Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service exercises operational control of the  U.S. SIGINT System
VQ-1	Fleet Air Reconnaissance Squadron  One (FAIRECONRON ONE)	(U) U.S. Navy reconnaissance squadron based at NAS ^Vhidbey Island, ^VA.  VQ-1 operated the incident EP-3.
ZEROIZE	n /a	(U) A process that erases the key variable or other sto red material, and renders the devices essentially  useless and the data unrecoverable.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
64

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Term	Expansion	Definition/Descri ption
ZIRCON Chat	n / a	(U) A commercial internet relay chat application used on the secure Joint ^W orldwide Intelligence  Co m m unications Syste m network. A llows multiple  intelligence providers to communicate with deployed  threat warning recipients.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
65

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

A ppendix A

(U) Sum mary of Reco m mendations

(U) This appendix lists all recommendations in matrix form and suggests a
responsible organization for each.

Section Reference	Recommendation / POC
(U) COMINT Equip  and Documentation	Reco mmendation #1 (U//FOUO) Limit classified and sensitive materials carried onboard SRO platforms to mission-essential materials only. Minimize
Section 4.2; also 4.3	hardcopy materials in favor of electronic media.
	POC/Action: NSA and SRO Units
(U) COMINT Equip  and Documentation	Recommendation #2 (U//FOUO) Identify computer hard drives for priority  destruction and/or jettison. Mark hard drives with a location for striking to
Section 4.2; also 4.3	ensure physical destruction.
	POC/Action: NSA and SRO Units
(U) COMINT Equip	Recommendation #3 (U//FOUO) Eliminate source code from fielded
and Documentation  Section 4.2	software.
	POC/Action: NSA and other software originators
(U) COMINT Equip	Reco mmendation #4 (U//FOUO) Eliminate tape-based recording, replacing
and Documentation  Section 4.2	it with computer-based recorders with built-in equipment.
	POC/Action: NSA and SCEs
(U) COMINT Equip  and Documentation  Section 4.2	Reco mmendation #5 (S//SI) Re move processing capability fo r the HUNTER and PREDATOR UAV and JASSM datalink signals from LUNCHBOX.
	POC/Action: NSA and Platform Sponsors
(U) COMINT Equip	Reco mmendation #6 (S) P rovide a tailored signals processing capability that
and Documentation  Section 4.2	fully meets mission requirements for rapid signal detection and identification.
	POC/Action: NSA
(U) COMINT Equip	Reco mmendation #7 (U//FOUO) Replace the SCARAB computer key-lock
and Documentation  Section 4.2	mechanism with a manual quick-release bolt.
	POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) COMINT Equip  and Documentation  Section 4.2	Recommendation #8 (C) Review compromised USSID material to determine if there is a need to change, modify, or update any USSID.
	POC/Action: NSA
(U) COMINT Equip  and Documentation  Section 4.2	Reco mmendation #9 (S) Continue to monitor P RC co m m unications fo r evidence of denial and deception activities related to SRO m issions.
	POC/Action: NSA
(U) SIGINT  Config uration IM gmt  Section 4.4	Recommendation #10 (U//FOUO) ^Work with industry and the Intelligence Community to develop and implement safeguard capabilities for SIGINT equipment and materials used by SRO platforms and other SIGINT collection
	activities at risk.
	POC/Action: NSA

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
66

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Section Reference	Recommendation / POC
(U) SIGINT  Config uration IM gmt  Section 4.4	Reco mmendation #11 (U//FOUO) Develop and implement configuration controls to govern the use of NSA-deployed software versions and maintain  cognizance of field modifications; include procedures to annually overwrite all software with the most currently available software.  POC/Action: NSA and SCEs
(U) Cryptographic  IM a terials and Equip  Section 5.3	Recommendation #12 (U//FOUO) Limit COMSEC materials and  cryptologic devices onboard deployed platfo rms to those required to  accomplish the platform s mission in a specific timeframe and in a given area  of responsibility.  POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Cryptographic Materials and Equip  Section 5.3	Recommendation #13 (U//FOUO) Use electronic key loading devices and  leave hardcopy key tape and canisters at the staging base.  POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Cryptographic Materials and Equip  Section 5.3	Recommendation #14 (U//FOUO) Maintain a comprehensive and readily available inventory of all field-deployed COMSEC materials and cryptologic  devices.  POC/Action: NSA
(U) Cryptographic Materials and Equip  Section 5.3	Recommendation #15 (U) Maintain destruction records and supersession messages at the staging base.  POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Cryptographic Materials and Equip  Section 5.3	Reco mmendation #16 (S) Continue to refine procedures for timely supersession of GPS worldwide key.  POC/Action: SPACECOM
(U) Cryptographic Materials and Equip  Section 5.3	Reco mmendation #17 (S) M ake crosscut shredders available fo r emergency destruction of keying material.  POC/Action: SRO Units and SCEs
(U) Cryptologic  Foreign Partner Impact  Section 6.3	Recommendation #18 (U//FOUO) Coordinate notification procedures and notify foreign partners of pertinent information compromised to the PRC.  POC/Actio n : NSA, in coordination with Intelligence Community
(U) Counterintelligence	Reco mmendation #19 (U//FOUO) Re move names of all individuals and
Issues  Section 6.5	organizations from forwarding instructions, technical material, and software  carried on SRO or other sensitive SIGINT operations.  POC/Action: NSA and software providers
(U) Counterintelligence	Reco mmendation #20 (U//FOUO) Red uce the amount of personnel
Issues  Section 6.5	information in mission materials to the minimum possible. Do not reference  organizations, offices, or names of personnel.  POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) U.S. Cryptologic System Crisis Response  Sectio n 7.10	Reco mmendation #21 (U/FOUO) Implement streamlined NSA policy regarding raw SIGINT.  POC/Action: NSA

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
67

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Sectio n Reference	Recommendation / POC
(U) U.S. Crypto logic  Syste m Crisis Res ponse  Sectio n 7.10	Recommendation #22 (U//FOUO) The Secretary of Defense in coordination with the DCI should charter a damage assessment team within 48 hours of a potential compromise involving DoD assets. The team should serve as the
	lead for producing findings, damage assessment, and recommendations.
	POC/Action: OSD/CMS
(U) U.S. Crypto logic	Reco mmendation #23 (C) Implement procedures to increase the SIGINT
System Crisis Response  Sectio n 7.10	system s responsiveness during crisis events.
	POC/Action: NSA
(U) U.S. Crypto logic System Crisis Response  Sectio n 7.10	Reco mmendation #24 (C) Tie the monitoring of international distress frequencies to specific NICKELBACK advisory conditions.
	POC/Action: NSA
(U) U.S. Crypto logic System Crisis Response  Sectio n 7.10	Recommendation #25 (U//FOUO) Acquire a record and playback capability immediately for all Pacific Tributary Network (PTN) broadcasts at the  KRSOC.
	POC/Action: NSA
(U) U.S. Crypto logic	Reco mmendation #26 (U//FOUO) Al lot sufficient ti me fo r intelligence
System Crisis Response	debriefings in order to allow a thorough determination of potentially
Sectio n 7.10	compromised data.
	POC/Action: JPRA
(U) U.S. Crypto logic System Crisis Response	Recommendation #27 (U//FOUO) Incorporate intelligence debriefing into  J P RA personnel recovery procedures if there is an Intelligence Community
Sectio n 7.10	equ ity.
	POC/Action: JPRA
(U) U.S. Crypto logic	Recommendation #28 (U//FOUO) The Secretary of Defense and the DCI
System Crisis Response	jointly prepare a damage assessment "how to" guide for intel ligence
Sectio n 7.10	co m pro m ises.
	POC/Action: OSD/CMS
(U) Policy	Recommendation #29 (U//FOUO) Establish written guidance for aircrew
Section 8.2	actions in the event of hazardous maneuvers by reacting fighters.
	POC/Action: JCS/CINCs
(U) Policy  Section 8.2	Recommendation #30 (U//FOUO) Provide detailed guidance for Mission  Commander and crew actions in the event of a forced landing of the mission
	aircraft in countries within range of the mission track.
	POC/Action: JCS/CINCs
(U) Policy	Recommendation #31 (U//FOUO) Require peacetime detention training for
Section 8.2	all reconnaissance personnel and personnel engaged in other sensitive
	operations where there is a risk of detention.
Due! Jan 01	POC/Action: SRO Units and SCEs
(U) Policy	Reco mmendation #3 2 (U) Explore pursuing an agreement with the P RC to
Section 8.2	establish joint procedures to prevent dangerous military activities.
	POC/Action: JCS/CINCs

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
68

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Section Reference	Recommendation / POC
(U) Radio  Communications	Recommendation #33 (U//FOUO) Incorporate guidance into emergency  destruction procedures identifying communication equipment that should not
Section 8.3	be zeroized or destroyed until no longer needed.  POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Radio  Communications	Reco mmendation #34 (U//FOUO) Train flight crew personnel in the  emergency communication procedures used by countries in their areas of
Section 8.3	operations.  POC/Action: Navy Type Com manders, and other service equivalents
(U) Radio  Communications	Reco mmendation #35 (U//FOUO) Provide guidance in the DoD Flight  Information Handbook specific to emergency communications with the P RC
Section 8.3	and other target nations.  POC/Action: NI M A (National Imagery & Mapping Ag ency) working with  Theater CI NCs
(U) Internal Communications	Reco mmendation #36 (U//FOUO) Improve the performance and intelligibility of the EP-3E P A system to operate b etter in all environments.
Section 8.4	POC/Action: NAVAIR
(U) Internal Communications	Reco mmendation #3 7 (U//FOUO) Increase training using helm ets during  drills so that crew members are proficient at communicating while wearing
Section 8.4	helm ets.  POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Internal Communications	Reco mmendation #38 (U//FOUO) Ree mphasize the critical role of clear  communications between the flight station and aircrew cabin during
Section 8.4	emergency procedure and Aircrew Coordination Training.  POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Internal Communications	Reco mmendation #39 (U//FOUO) Drill emergency crew communications  procedures in-flight on a routine basis, practicing reconfiguration of internal
Section 8.4	communications and alternate communications paths for all combinations of  emergencies.  POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Internal Communications	Reco mmendation #40 (U//FOUO) As a required part of pre-mission  briefings, identify by name key personnel and alternates responsible for
Section 8.4	leading crew actions and making status reports during emergency destruction.  POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Internal Communications	Recommendation #41 (U//FOUO) Design and implement improved emergency communications procedures and hardware on the EP-3E to enable
Section 8.4	reliable communications at all times, especially during abnormal flight  conditions. Investigate wireless communications systems.  POC/Action: NAVAIR
(U) Classified and Sensitive Material	Reco mmendation #4 2 (S//SI) Ensure the Mission Commander and other  personnel responsible fo r emergency d estruction are fully cognizant of the
1 landling  Section 8.5	scope and nature of all classified materials onboard the aircraft and are in  compliance with USSID 3.
	POC/Action: SRO Units and SCEs

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
69

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Section Reference	Recommendation / POC
(U) Classified and Sensitive Material  1 landling	Reco mmendation #43 (C) Review USSID 3 requirements for the protection o f COM INT systems and data at all classification levels.
Section 8.5	POC/Action: NSA
(U) Classified and	Recommendation #44 (U//FOUO) Issue policy to increase the detail in
Sensitive Material	material inventories to support a rapid and accurate pag e-fo r-page
landling  Section 8.5	reconstruction of all sensitive and classified materials, including all files on  hard disks, CD ROMs, and floppy disks.
	POC/Action: NSA and SCEs
(U) Classified and	Reco mmendation #45 (U//FOUO) Maintain exact backup copies of all
Sensitive Material landling	electronic media at a ground support facility fo r every mission.
Section 8.5	POC/Action: SSO Navy, SRO Units
(U) Classified and	Recommendation #46 (U//FOUO) Establish written procedures designating
Sensitive Material	specific ground support personnel who will verify aircraft inventories and
1 landling  Section 8.5	electronic media backups prior to every mission.
	POC/Action: SSO Navy, SRO Units
(U) Classified and	Recommendation #47 (C) Review and change, as required, compromised
Sensitive Material landling	operational information such as radio call signs and frequencies.
Section 8.5	POC/Action: JCS/CINCs
(U) Emerg Destruction	Recommendation #48 (U//FOUO) Train aircrew on emergency destruction
P olicy, P rocedures, and Training	procedures in a formal setting prior to their operational deployment.
Section 8.6	POC/Action: SRO units and SCEs
(U) Emerg Destruction	Recommendation #49 (U//FOUO) Include emergency destruction training,
Policy, Procedures, and	to include both classroom training and in-flight drills, during crew work-ups.
Training  Section 8.6	Include all crew members from all commands participating in operations.
	POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Emerg Destruction	Recommendation #50 (U//FOUO) Require regular emergency destruction
Policy, Procedures, and	drills during detachments; include situations where destruction procedures are
Training  Section 8.6	impeded by simultaneous emergencies (e.g., fire of unknown origin, preparations to bail out and/or ditch) and constrained by time limits.
	POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Emerg Destruction	Recommendation #51 (U//FOUO) Include emergency destruction
Policy, Procedures, and	responsibilities and procedures in pre-mission briefings, similar to those for
Training  Section 8.6	ditching, bailout, and fire of unknown origin.
	POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Emerg Destruction	Recommendation #52 (U//FOUO) Issue individualized written emergency
Policy, Procedures, and Training	destruction procedures to all crew members prior to flight.
Section 8.6	POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Emerg Destruction Policy, Procedures, and Training	Recommendation #53 (U//FOUO) Include emergency destruction as a sub- area of all positional NATOPS qualifications.
Section 8.6	POC/Action: Aircraft Model Managers

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
70

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Section Reference	Recommendation / POC
(U) Emerg Destruction  P olicy, P rocedures, and Training  Section 8.6	Reco mmendation #54 (U//FOUO) Ensure sufficient type and quantity of  emergency destruction tools are onboard mission aircraft.  POC/Action: N AV AI R, other service equivalents
(U) Emerg Destruction Policy, Procedures, and Training  Section 8.6	Recommendation #55 (U//FOUO) Develop practical procedures for  inventorying jettisoned or destroyed materials.  POC/Action: N AV AI R, other service equivalents
(U) Emerg Destruction Policy, Procedures, and Training  Section 8.6	Reco mmendation #56 (U//FOUO) Conduct and document periodic  emergency destruction reviews to ensure procedures are current with  technology and mission environment changes.  POC/Action: SRO Units and SCEs
(U) Emerg Destruction Policy, Procedures, and Training  Section 8.6	Reco mmendation #5 7 (U//FOUO) For any equipment not covered by current  emergency destruction procedures, require new procedures and training before  allowing the equipment onboard.  POC/Action: SRO Units, NAVAIR
(U) Emerg Destruction Policy, Procedures, and Training  Section 8.6	Reco mmendation #58 (U//FOUO) Provide national-level guidance fo r  jettisoning classified materials.  POC/Action: JCS
(U) Crew Reaction  Section 8.7	Recommendation #59 (U//FOUO) Review and formalize crew certification  procedures for each deploying crew. Include demonstrated ability to execute all emergency procedures satisfactorily, and emergency destruction under less  than optimal conditions.  POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Crew Reaction  Section 8.7	Reco mmendation #60 (U//FOUO) As part of individual qualification, require  trainees to exercise and demonstrate proper emergency destruction procedures during in-flight examination.  POC/Action: SRO Units
(U) Crew Reaction  Section 8.7	Recommendation #61 (U//FOUO) Examine current organizations with the  objective of aligning crew training, cohesion unity, and overall experience.  POC/Action: Cryptologic and VQ communities
(U) Systemic Issues  Section 9.3	Reco mmendation #62 (U//FOUO) I mplement, track, and institutionalize the  study's recommendations.
	POC/Action: CNO, DIRNSA, and SCEs

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
71

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

A

ppendix

B

1

1.1

(U//FOUO) L ist of Cryptologic Equipment and Information

Com prom ised

(U) SIGINT M

(U) P olicy Documents — USSID M ate rial

1.1.1	(U) Hardcopy USSID Material

(S//SI) The following USSID material was determined to compromised either
entirely or partially. Most of the hardcopy USSID material was not carried onboard in its
entirety, but was mentioned or partially described in Job Qualification Requirements
(JQR), Working A ids, and personal notes. The following material was not destroyed and
was left onboard the aircraft in a storage locker.

USSID	Title	Level of Compromise
1	SIGINT Operating policy	Excerpt
3	SIGINT Security Procedures	Excerpts, including Annex A, Section 6 (entire)
9	Host Government  Communications	Excerpts and references
18	Legal Compliance & Minimization Procedures	Excerpts and references
101	COMINT Collection Instructions	Excerpts and references
110	Collection Management  Procedures	Extensive, including Annex H
205	Standard Technical Report Using  Modules (STRUM)	Excerpts and references in Pos 19  tech
212	PROFORMA Signals Processing  and Technical Reporting	Excerpts and references in POS  20 tech.
301	Handling of Critical (CRITIC)  Information	Extensive, including Annex L
369	Time-Sensitive SIGINT Reporting	Excerpts and references in POS 4 tech material, POS 15 ^V orking  Aid, POS 19 Tech
404	Technical Extracts from Traffic  Analysis (TEXTA)	Entire USSID, excerpts from TEXTA manual
2846	SIGINT Tasking for USN-846	Extensive excerpts and references  in POS 19 Tech

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
72

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

5511	Advisory Support to Sensitive	Detailed description of
	Reconnaissance	NICKELBACK conditions and
		terms, Annex A

1.1.2	(U) Softcopy USSID Material

(S//SI) Softcopy of the following USSID material was loaded on the COMINT
Supervisor’s laptop that was left onboard the aircraft. M easures were taken to destroy the
laptop (and hard drive). Combining what we know about these efforts, expert testimony,
and anal ysis of the returned laptop, there is a very low likelihood that sensitive
cryptologic information could be recovered. As a result, all USSID material listed below
is considered as a possible compromise.

USSID	Title	Annexes and Changes Included
3	SIGINT Security Procedures	Annex A- F
9	Host Government Communications	
18	Legal Compliance and  Minimization Procedures	Annex A-K
107	Burst Signal Recognition & Reporting Procedures	Annex A, B
205	Standard Technical Report Using Modules (SRUM)	Annex A, E
212	PROFORMA Signals Processing  and Technical Reporting	Annex A- E
214	Preliminary Mission Summary  (PREMS)	
223	PRC Air Communications Activity Reporting	Annex A-C
301	Handling of Critical (CRITIC)  Information	Annex A- I
303	SIGINT Reporters’ Instructions	SIGINT Reporters’ Instructions  for: N. Korea AF, Cambodia, Vietnam, Philippines, Thailand
312	SIGINT Reporters’ Instructions for  the Republics of the Former Soviet Union	
313	Reporting of Distress Signals	
316	Non-Codeword Reporting Program	Annex D  North Korean Forces
320	SIGINT Reporters Instructions for  the People’s Republic of China	Annex A- F
321	SIGINT Reporters’ Instructions for  Southeast Asia	
342	PROFORMA Technical Reporting	

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
73

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

369	Time Sensitive SIGINT Reporting	Annex A, B; changes 1'5
2846	SIGINT Tasking for USN'846	
5511	COMINT Advisory Support to  Sensitive Reconnaissance  Operations	Annex A'D

1.2	(U) COMINT Material

was carried onboard the
hand'shredded and left onboard

1.2.1	(S) Hardcopy COMINT Material

(S//SI) H ardcopy and softcopy COMINT material

aircraft. The hardcopy material listed below was intact or
the EP-3E. Am material is considered to be compromised.

	Title	Description
A.	PRC Air Tech	Compilation of tech data from multiple sources.
		Includes the following
A.1	Air Order of Battle  (AOB) for PLAAF and PLANAF Air Bases	-	Type of aircraft assigned including  transports  -	Number of each Aircraft assigned
A.2	Airfields	Technical data listing document including.  -	Placename and Placename abbreviation  (PNAB)  -	Geographic coordinates
		-	Identifying data for each airfield  -	Runway orientation  -	Atmospheric pressure  -	Ground controller callsigns  -	Pilot Billet Suffix (PBS)  -	Airfield-specific terminology  -	Subordination
A.3	Maps of Airfields	-	Includes current PRC deployments
A.4	Air Frames	-	Capabilities  -	Armament
A.5	PREAMBLE Address Groups (PAGS)	- PLANAF
A.6	Activity Codes	-	STRUM  -	IATS

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
74

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

.7	Sample Reports	-	KLIEGLIGHTs (KL)  -	Mission Related Technical Summary  (MRTS)  -	STRUM
.8	Civilian  Airline rs/Transports	-	Type  -	Owner/operator  -	Home base
A.9	Military navigation call signs and cover numbers	
B.	PRC Naval Tech	
B.1	PRC Navy Order of  Battle	-	PRC Navy Fleet subordination
B.2	Ship weapons/sensors  fits	-	Capabilities of weapons fits
B.3	Communications and Observations P ost/Signal  station listing	
.4	Preamble Address  Groups (PAGS) listing	- PRC Navy
B.5	Taiwan Navy Tech	-	Order of battle  -	Subordination
.6	Tactical signals and  cove rte rms	
.7	WNP-27 strip (call sign  encryption strip)	-	Instructions  -	Historic records (5 year history)
B.8	ELINT associated with PRC Navy vessels	
.9	Map of Spratly Islands	
B.10	Communications Profile	-	VHF/HF Frequency List  -	Channel Numbers  -	Tactical activity scenarios/identifiers
C.	Supervisor’s Working  Aid	
C.1	Collection Requirement Number (CRN) Tasking	-	PRC  -	N. Korea  -	Global World
C.2	Intercept Tasking  Database (ITDB)	-	PRC and Southeastern Asia  -	Blocks 44-52, 44-53, 44-54
C.3	SRO Mission Track  Points	Tracks  -	5Q2001  -	5Q2002  -	5Q1000  -	5Q3001

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
75

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

C.4	STRUM Codes	-	Air Activity Codes  -	Naval Activity Codes
C.5	Miscellaneous KL Info	-	FLAGS  -	CANS  -	PDDG
C.6	PRC Air Surveillance  (ASV)	-	Reacting Airfields  -	Tracking stations/methods/formats
C.7	VQ-1 Mission  Commander’s Notebook	-	Advisory notifications summary
C.8	Integrated Air Defense  System (IADS)	-	Hand written notes
D	COMEVAL Brief  Binder	
D.1	Mission Brief	-	Intel Brief  -	VQ-1 Misawa daily flight schedule
D.2	Airframes/Ships  Weapons Fits	-	PRC  -	Taiwan
D.3	PRC Maps	-	Air bases  -	SAM Locations  -	Submarine/Naval combatants
D.4	Taiwan Maps	-	Fighter disposition  -	Ground attack fighters
D.5	Japanese P-3 Operations Area	-	Maps
E	Secu re  Com m unications  Operator (POS 4) Working Aid	
E.1	POS 4 Start-up  procedures	
E.2	Mission Log form	-	Tempi ate only
E.3	NICKLEBACK  Advisory Codes	- Summary
E.4	Air Force Advisory Notifications Instruction	
E.5	Message Format  Sampl es	-	Advisory Notification  -	CRITIC  -	KLIEGLIGHT
E.6	Standard Operating Procedure for Kadena	-	Callsigns  -	SIPRNET addresses
F	Manual Morse  Operator (POS 19)  Working Aid	
F.1	SLIPSTICK	-	Az imuth and Range tool

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
76

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

F.2	PRC/Vietnam Tech	-	Air Order of Battle  -	Tracking Methods
F.3	PRC Defensive Position Reports	-	5Q1000  -	5Q2001  -	5Q2002
F.4	Maps	-	South China Sea  -	Taiwan Strait
F.5	PRC ASV & Air Order  of Battle	-	AZ/Range, All-China Grid, Special  Reporting Grid  -	Arbitrary Unit Designators  -	WAJAD-9  -	N-12 Cipher System  -	Basic Callsign System
F.6	Vietnamese ASV & Air Order of Battle	-	Arbitrary Unit Designators
F.7	Manual Morse Breakouts	
G	S&T Special Signals Operator (POS 20)  Tech	
G.1	General PROFORMA  Info/Descriptions	-	MARKHAM  -	FOREJUDGE  -	SAM HEARTBURN  -	NOVELETTE  -	RSBN
G.2	P acific T heater Top Twenty Signals Search Priorities	-	PRC signals only
G.3	Air Order of Battle	- PRC and Vietnam
G.4	TEXSIG descriptions	-	XXS S9337  -	XXS K4311  -	XXS K4318  -	XXS K4331
H	Airborne Cryptologic Direct Support Element  (CSDE) Senior  Operator Study  M odule	
H.1	Mission Tracks	-	5Q2001  -	5Q2002  -	5Q1000
H.2	Taiwan TACAIR  Working Aid	-	Air Order of Battle  -	Aircraft/Armament/ELI NT  -	Airfields/Coordinates/Runway orientation  -	Ground Controller Recoveries  -	Aircraft callsigns/prefixes, including NATO

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
77

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

		-	Top 20 Frequency li sts  -	Known and recovered frequencies  -	Taiwan Air Defense Identification Zone
H.3	Taiwan Navy Order of Battle	-	Basic Naval tactics  -	Pictures of naval entities
I	F orms F older	
I.1	KLIEGLIGHT Format	-	Tempi ate only
I.2	STRUM Format	-	Tempi ate only
I.3	PREM format	-	Templ ate only
I.4	Cond3/ Cond3 Summary  NICKLEBACK	-	Templ ate only
I.5	Cond 4 NICKLEBACK	-	Templ ate only
I.6	Morse Auto KL	-	Templ ate only
J	Airborne Direct  Su pport Operations Chinese Navy  Operatoi— JQR Signature Sheet (10 Oct  98)	-	Signature list of training topics  -	Contains references to classified online  working aids at NAIC, CTEP, and KRSOC  -	Some hand-written notes included
K	Airborne Direct  Support Operations Chinese Navy Operator  - Study Guide (10 Oct  98)	-	PLAN Mission, threat, disputes  -	PLAN Organization  -	Shore installations  -	Flotillas and squadrons  -	Combatant Ordei— of-Battle  -	Auxiliaries, numbering system, prefixes  -	VHF communications procedures  -	Tactical Maneuvering Communications Procedures  -	Tactical Activities (submarine, anti- surface/anti-air,  -	HF communications (HF voice/manual  Morse, RIBBED (COZY III), National/fleet  support broadcast  -	Geography  -	Missile systems
L	Airborne Fleet Operations Chinese Intermediate JQR	-	Signature list of training topics  -	Contains references to classified online working aids at NSA
L.1	Target Training Package: Submarine Launched Ballistic Missile Activity	-	Organization, launch platforms, missile system, Areas of Operation, past SLBM  launches  -	Missile testing operations  -	Communications  -	Vocabulary

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
78

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

L.2	Target Training Package. Air_to_Surface Attack	-	PRC Aircraft (fighters and helicopters) description and armament  -	Range communications  -	Attack Phase  -	Vocabulary
L.3	Map of PRC airfields	
M	Airborne Direct	-	USN-846 overview (including supported
	Su pport Operations	Aircraft, SRO missions, Track numbers,
	CHILING TAC AIR	fleet support missions)
	Operatoi	JQR	-	EP-3E organization (positions, relationships)
	Signature Sheet &	-	Tasking and associated activities
	Study Guide (15 Sept	-	Reporting (internal, external, CRITIC)
	97)	-	COMINT Advisory Support and conditions  -	USSID descriptions (3, 18, 101, 150, 313,  320)  -	PRC Air Defense (Mission, Air surveillance)  -	PRC Air Order of Battle (TEXTA Manual,  Units & locations, Geography)  -	PRC Aircraft including indicators  -	Activity (local airfield, basic flight, combat training, reactions, live intercept, defensive  patrols, navigation training and inter-airfield flights, bomber activity)  -	Transcription requirements
N	IM anual Morse  Refresher (POS 19)	-	JQR Signature sheet
N.1	Advisory Support	-	Includes ground sites who can issue external
	Operations Information  (NICKELBACK)	conditions
N.2	Mission Covernames and	- BEGGAR HAWK
	descriptions	-	BEGGAR SHADOW  -	CAPSULE JACK  -	DISTANT WIND  -	DISTANT SENT
O	COMEVAL JQR	-	Signature list of training topics with detailed
	SIGNATURE SHEET	notes on items (listed below)
O.1	Airborne Reconnaissance	- USCINCPAC Manual 5157 notes
	Fundamentals	-	Advisory Support (NICKELBACK)  terminology  -	Ground Unit ADSO support  -	SRO platforms and mission descriptions  -	Mission numbers and operating areas  -	Squadron locations and collection capabilities

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
79

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

O.2	North Korea Tech  Materia l	-	NKAF Air Order of Battle  -	NKAF F ighter/Bomber characteristics  -	SAM indications and sites  -	Map of NKA F significant placenames
O.3	Hand-written notes in  JQR	-	USSID identification  -	Radio/telephone procedures  -	U.S. Fleet organization  -	Command/MCOC organization  -	W arfighter Communications paths (TRE,  TRAP, TDDS, TOPS, TIBS)  -	COMINT releasability caveats (SEABOOT,  SETTEE, KAMPUS, DRUID, RORIPA, NOFORN, ORCON)  -	Callsign definitions  -	NK Air Defense System  -	NK SAM force  -	UNACCENTED description (not in detail)  -	NK MRBM Launch indicators  -	NK Reacting Airfields  -	NK Infiltration Operations  -	PRC	Airfields and aircraft locations  -	PRC	Reacting Airfields  -	PRC	Naval Auxiliary vessel classes  -	PRC	ASV Tracking Stations  -	Russian PACOFAF, PVO/TAF, and SAF  Airfields  -	Russian Naval Base missions and orders of  battle  -	Russian weapons range activities  -	Russian aircraft, weapons and associated  ELINT /PROFORMA  -	Russian Surface Order of Battle  -	Russian missiles, platforms, ELINT, ranges  -	Russian SA-10B Group of Battalions reactions and associated ELINT  -	Russian Case notation break-out  -	ONAZN-004 System, CER break-out  -	Russian reaction/exercise scenarios  -	Taiwan aircraft/combatants including mission, weapons, associated ELINT  -	Vietnam airfields/naval bases including  mission and order of battle  -	Vietnam aircraft including mission, weapons, and associated ELINT  -	Vietnam threat airfields  -	Spratley Islands re-supply operations

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
80

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

O.4

Signals terminology

POS 20 equipment descriptions
P ublications descriptions (RASIN manual,
COTS manual, COMINT P arameters List,
Search Environment List, PROFORMA

Signals index)

References to enciphered and scrambled
speech, cellular, short duration signal, ALE,
low probability of intercept

PROFORMA signal descriptions,

coverterms and associated target countries.

1.2.2	(U) Softcopy COMINT Mater

(S//SI) The COMINT Supervisor’s laptop contained softcopy COMINT material

(as well as USSID material detailed previously). The material listed below is considered
as a possible compromise, given our assessment that there is a very low likelihood of
recovering data from the laptop.

A

COMINT Supervisor’s Lap

top

Desc riptic

A.1

V

arious

Classified Webpage

Classified W ebpages from internal NSA

web

-	Includes numerous names of
individuals

-	Internal web address information

-	Extensive information about KRSOC

A.2

North K

orean

Tech M ate rial

N. K orean grid key/SPC page
recoveries (A pr 99)

DSA T echnical Information Report

(32-1-99)

N. K orean East and W est Coast Voi ■
(Case, Cal lsign, C lass, AUD)

N. K orean East and W est Coast M or
(Case, Callsign, ID, AUD)

N. K orean ELINT notations

A.3

Floppy Disk

STRUMS ( previous 24 m onths)
Partial PREMS ( previous 6 months)

1.3	(U) COMINT S

ystems

(S) T he COMINT equipment onboard the aircraft was generally unclassified
with the exception of two carry-on computers, a SCARAB computer containing

the LUNCHBOX PROFORMA processor and a laptop containing MARTES

analysis tools. All data resident on these two systems is considered compromised.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
81

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

	Ite m	Description
A	SCARAB Computer	-	LUNCHBOX PROFORMA Processor  -	XBIT Signals Analysis software (bit  manipulation)  -	BLACKMAGIC Demodulation software
B	MARTES Laptop	-	MARTES (COMINT version 1999.0.2)  -	RAS IN Manual  -	RAS IN Manual Working Aid  -	Telegraphic Codes Manual

1.4	(U) ELINT Ma

(S) Hardcopy and softcopy ELINT material was carried onboard the aircraft. The
list of materials below was left onboard the EP-3E, either intact or hand-shredded, and is
considered compromised.

1.4.1	(S) Hardcopy ELINT Material

	Ite m	Desc ription
A	NRO Radar Fingerprinting	-	Australian MoD draft report on
	document	AN/ULQ-16 employment  -	AN/U LQ-16 wiring diagrams  -	Radar fingerprinting techniques and  procedures  -	Precise radar parametric data for  USCGC Jarvis
B	Lab Operator Standard Notebook	
B.1	Standard ELINT operating	-	Signal logging and reporting procedures
	procedures	-	TACELINT message format  -	Standard location and signal annotation  abbreviations
B.2	ELINT recording procedures	-	Procedures for recording, annotating,  and forwarding recorded wideband  signals
B.3	EOB downloading procedures	-	Downloading and formatting  procedures for MIDB EOB data at http://luna.diac.dia.ic.gov/DBAinfonet/  DOWNLOAD/F iles/help.html
B.4	Sonobuoy exploitation notes	-	Russian sonobuoy interrogation data  formats and audio frequencies
B.5	Surface-to-Air Missile (SAM)	-	Association of ELNOTs with missile
	and Surface-to-Surface Missile	fire control radars, beacons, seekers,
	(SSM) notes	and illuminators  -	Missile guidance signal format notes

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
82

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

		- Association of PROFORMA signals  with missile systems
C	Lab Operator T rainee Study  Notes (POS 10)	
C.1	Russian F ar East M il ita ry	-	Association of fighter and bomber
	District (FEMD) Air Order of	aircraft with airfields
	Battle	-	Standard aircraft weapon and radar fits  -	Association of ELNOTs with NATO  names and standard parametric bands of  radars
C.2	Russian FEMD Naval Order of	-	Standard combatant surface vessel
	Battle	weapon fits  -	Standard submarine ballistic and cruise  missile fits  -	Association of ELNOTs with NATO  names and standard parametric bands of  radars
C.3	Russian SAM notes	-	U.S. doctrinal ranges of Russian SAM systems  -	Association of ELNOTs with NATO  names and standard parametric bands of SAM associated radars.
C.4	PRC Air Order of Battle	-	Association of fighter and bomber aircraft with major airfields in the Shenyang, Beijing, Jinan, Nanjing, and Guangzhou Military Regions  -	Standard aircraft weapon and radar fits  -	Association of ELNOTs with NATO  and commercial names and standard  parametric bands of radars
C.5	PRC Naval Order of Battle	-	Surface vessel weapon fits for combatant vessels of frigate size and larger, by hull  -	Association of submarines, by hull, to operational bases  -	Association of ELNOTs with NATO  and commercial names and PRC  military designations of maritime radars  -	Standard parametric bands of PRC  maritime radars
D	SEVAL and Mission  Com mander Brief Binders	- Identical to COMEVAL Brief Binder
D.1	Mission Brief	-	Intel Brief  -	VQ-1 Misawa daily flight schedule
D.2	Airframes/Ships Weapons F its	-	PRC  -	Taiwan

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
83

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

D.3	PRC Maps	-	Air bases  -	SAM Locations  -	Submarine/Naval combatants
D.4	Taiwan Maps	-	Fighter disposition  -	Ground attack fighters
D.5	Japanese P-3 Operations Area	-	Maps
E	IM ission Chart	- SRO Track 5Q2002 coordinates
F	ELINT Parameter Limits  (EPL)	-	September 2000 Yellow EPL  -	March 1999 Blue EPL  -	Both manuall y updated through Feb  2001

1.4.2	(U) Softcopy ELINT Ma

(S) T he ELINT E valuators laptop computer was destroyed by the crew and left
onboard the aircraft. The laptop hard drive was recovered, though not found with the
laptop. Both were analyzed by NSA expe rts and it was determined that the hard drive

probably survived crew destruction attempts only to be copied and then destroyed by the
PRC. An data resident on this system is considered compromised. A zip disk and floppy
disk from the Lab Operators position were also compromised.

	Ite m	Description
A	ELINT Evaluator s Laptop Computer	
A.1	Electronic Order of Battle  (EOB)	- Derived from EOB-LITE in late 2000.  Contained worldwide radar location  data.
A.2	VQ-1 Mission Commander Notebook	-	Squadron specific guidance for  implementation of USSID 5511 and  CINCPACINST 5157 SRO  requirements  -	SRO Track coordinates for all VQ-1  tracks  -	Misc. message templates  -	COMINT Sanitization Primer  -	AN/ALQ-108 OPSEC and employment  guidance  -	PREMS (previous 6 months)
B	Lab Operator Zip Disk	
B.1	Collector Technical ELINT Guidance Manual (CTEGM)	- Version dated 28 February 2000
B.2	HULTEC Database	-	Pacific HULTEC database derived from  JICPAC database
B.3	Electronic Order of Battle  (EOB)	- Derived from DIA EOB-LITE in  F ebruary 2001. Contained worldwide  radar location data.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
84

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

C	Lab Operator F loppy Disk	
C.1	TACELINT Reports	-	Misc. VQ-1 TACELINT reports for  F ebruary - March 2001 from PACOM  AOR  -	Misc. VQ-1 TACELINT reports for October - December 2000 from  CENTCOM AOR

1.4.3 (U) ELINT Syste

(S) T he bulk of the ELINT systems are off-the-shelf devices that, although
designed for the ELINT mission, contain no particularly sensitive technologies. Two
systems that represent a specific concern include the AN/ULQ-16 and the AN/ALQ-108.

	Ite m	Description
A	AN/ALQ-108	-	Passive and active exploitation of early  Soviet IFF and range extension signals
B	AN/ULQ-16	-	Precise radar pulse timing  measurements

2.	(U) COMSEC Material and Equipment

2.1	(U) COMSEC Material

(S) K eying material and other cryptographic material were taken onboard the
EP-3E. T he following items were hand-torn, remained onboard the aircraft, and are
considered compromised. All keying material (with the exception of GPS world wide
key) was superseded within 15 hours. The GPS was superseded within 11 days.

	Item	Dates/Seg ment
A.	AKAA 283 MARK XII Mode 3/A	31 Mar, 01 Apr
B.	AKAC 1553 TRIAD Numeral Cipher	31 Mar, 01 Apr
C.	AKAC L506USAF TRIAD Cipher	31 Mar, 01 Apr
D.	AKAL L506 USAF Strategic Operations  TRIAD Airborne MATRIX Authentication System	31 Mar, 01 Apr
E.	USKAC 374 USPACOM OPSCODE	April
F.	AKAK A4001 PACAF KL-43 Key	31 Mar, 01 Apr
G.	AKAT 3662 KI-1B/1C Punched tape	31 Mar, A&B
H.	AKAT A5523 KG-40A OP KEY	31 Mar, 01 Apr
I.	AKAT G2747 KY-57/58 OP KEY	Segments 3 & 4
J.	AKAT G2748 KY-57/58 OP KEY	Segments 3 & 4
K.	USKAT 1105 KY-57/58 OP KEY	31 Mar, 01 Apr
L.	USKAT 1619 KY-57/58 OP KEY	31 Mar, 01 Apr

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
85

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

M.	USKAT 20415 ANDVT OPKEY		31 Mar, 01 Apr
N.	USKAT A5503	KG-40A OP KEY	31 Mar
O.	USKAT B5697	KYV-5 OP KEY	31 Mar, 01 Apr
P.	USKAT 12228	KG-84 OP KEY	31 Mar, 01 Apr

2.2	(U) COMSEC E

quipment

(S) The following equipment was left onboard the aircraft. The recovery team
determined that the equipment was at a minimum examined by the PRC. T here were
signs of PRC intrusion into many pieces of equipment that could indicate PRC attempts
at reverse engineering.

	Title	Desc ription
A.	KY58 - 8 units	Secure Voice encryption device
B.	KG-84 - 2 units	Secure Data encryption device
C.	KL-43 - 1 unit	Off-line encryption device
D.	KIR-1C - 1 unit	Identify F riend or F oe (IFF)
E.	KIT-1C - 1 unit	Identify F riend or F oe (IFF)
F.	KG-40 - 1 unit	Secure Data encryption device
G.	KGX-40 - 1 unit	Remote control unit for KG-40
H.	KOI-18 - 2 units	Common fill device
I.	KYV-5 - 2 units	VACTOR Secure Voice encryption device (ANDVT)

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
86

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

A

ppendix

C

(U//FOUO) C ry pto l ogic F

oreign

P

artner

pact

(C) T he EP-3 A ssessment Team requested that NSA's O ffice of F oreign Relation
provide information on the impact of the EP-3E compromise to NSA' s cryptologic
foreign partners. This appendix provides NSA' s response and identifies internal actions
that NSA will take to notify foreign partners.

(U) NSA O ffice of F o

oreign Relations D eter m in ations
(TS//SI) After reviewing materials provided by the EP-3 A ssessment Team, the

Offi ce of Foreign Relations has determined that the impact to NSA’s foreign relations

program is low. We have identified below areas of potential compromise, recommended
actions, and due dates for those actions. No prior coordination with other Intelligence
Community or other US government officials, unless otherwise noted in the
recommended action, is required. The Offi ce of F oreign Relations will advise the
DCI/S pecial Assistant for Foreign Intelligence Relationships of this information. The
Offi ce of F oreign Relations and the Director, NSA will coordinate the release of this
information to other national civilian, military and Intelligence Community authorities in
any summary reports, briefings, or presentations.

(U//FOUO) A reas of Potential Compromise and Recommended Actions
1. (TS//SI) Fact of the following SIGINT relationships and associated releasability

De

caveats:

South Korea (KAMPUS, SETTEE, SEABOOT)
Japan (RORIPA)

Taiwan
Canada
Australia
New Zealand
United Kingdom

Action : (TS//SI) T he Office of Foreign Relations will request via formal message that
incountry NSA SIGINT representatives meet with partner agency counterparts to advise
them of the compromise, in the cases of South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan, since those
relationships are classified and protected in those nations. The C ommonwealth

relationships are unclassified. DUE: NLT 31 July 2001

2. (S//SI) Existence of airborne reconnaissance sharing programs with:

*	United Kingdom (NIMROD)

*	Japan (Project ARIEL)

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
87

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Action: (S//SI) The Offi ce of F oreign Relations will request via formal message that
incountry NSA SIGINT representatives coordinate with in-country USN representatives
an approach to the host-nation SIGINT and naval partners. In the case of Japan, in-
country coordination with COS T okyo is also recommended. The Offi ce of Foreign
Relations will request a summary from in-country representatives of their activities in this

regard. DUE: NLT 31 A ugust 2001

3. (C) NSA

procedures for targeting of host nation communications

(USSID 9).

Action : (C) T he Offi ce of Foreign Relations recommends no action be initiated with
foreign governments. If leaked, the Offi ce of Foreign Relations recommends in general
that a position of not commenting on the details of US intelligence activities be
maintained, but reserves the right to respond on a case-by-case basis to certain partner

nations. DUE: N/A

4. (TS//SI) Specific EP-3 targeting of T

aiwan:

Action : (TS//SI) T he Office of Foreign Relations will request via formal message that the
in- country NSA SIGINT representative in Taiwan advise the partner and other pertinent
Taiwanese intelligence and intelligence policy leadership that signals information
regarding Taiwanese military forces were compromised. Th e in-country representative
will emphasize to the partner that this type of information was on-board for situational
awareness reasons. The O ffice of F oreign Relations will request via email that the
SIGINT D irectorate coordinate with the Naval Security Group for the compilation of a
list of the specific information compromised. The SIGINT D irectorate will provide via
appropriate means this information to the in-country NSA representative for passage to
the Taiwanese partner. Concurrently, the Director of F oreign Relations will advise the
senior Taiwanese representative in the United States of the compromise. DUE: NLT 31

July 2001

5. (S//SI) Targeting of PROFORMA

signals of a multitude of nations

Action : (S//SI) The Offi ce of Foreign Relations recommends no action be initiated with
foreign governments. If leaked, the Offi ce of Foreign Relations recommends in general
that a position of not commenting on the details of US intelligence activities be
maintained, but reserves the right to respond on a case-by-case basis to certain partner or
All ied nations. The Office of F oreign Relations on a case-by-case basis may advise
them that this type of information was on- board to provide situational / threat awareness
information to the aircraft. We may note that US and other All ied PROFORMA data was
included in the equipment. DUE: N/A

6. (S//SI) Fact of staging of US Navy EP-3
(India/ P a kista n)

missions

from Th ailand and associated targets

Action : (TS//SI) T he Office of Foreign Relations will request via formal message that the
NSA representative in Thailand advise the US E mbassy country team of this

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
88

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

compromise. We do not believe the Thai partner SIGINT agency or government should
be advised of the compromise, because of the newness of the current partner leadership
and the tenuous political situation in Thail and. The Office of F oreign Relations
recommends no action be initiated with Indian or Pakistani partner governments
regarding the existence or origination of these flights or of the targeting of their
communications. In-country NSA representatives in India and Pakistan will be apprised

via email of the compromise and asked to advise respective COS’s and US Embassy

country teams for their background. If leaked, the Offi ce of F oreign Relations
recommends that a position of not commenting on the details of US intelligence activities

be maintained. DUE: NLT 31 July 2001

7.	(S//SI) PRC target data routinely shared with Asian and other partners

Action : (S//SI) The Offi ce of F oreign Relations will request via email that the SIGINT

Directorate, using appropriate means, advise foreign partners involved in the targeting of
PRC communications of the compromise of PRC target data, in order to prepare these

partners for potential SOI changes. DUE: NLT 31 July 2001

8.	(S//SI) EP-3 -based collection technology possibly also on partner EP-3 platforms

\ ssessment

Action : (S//SI) The Offi ce of Foreign Relations will request that the EP-3 A s
Team with the Naval Security Group identify compromised equipment similar to that on-
board partner EP-3 aircraft and develop appropriate presentations for foreign SIGINT and
naval partners. At that time an assessment regarding foreign partner approaches can be

made together with the EP-3 A ssessment Team and the Naval Security Group. DUE:

NLT 31 July 2001

9. (U//FOUO) A

ustra lian

SIGINT

partner tasking message

Action : (U//FOUO) The Offi ce of F oreign Relations has already advised DSD via email
to in- country US liaison personnel, as to the particular compromise. No further action

required. DUE: N/A

10. (C) F act of US SIGINT S y stem and/or EP-3 targeting of India, Pakistan, M alaysia,
Philippines, and Sri Lanka

Action : (S//SI) The Offi ce of Foreign Relations recommends no action be initiated with
these foreign governments, only two of which are SIGINT partners. We will request via
email that in- country NSA representatives in India and Pakistan advise their respective

COS’s and Embassy country teams, but not the partner governments, of the potential

compromise. No further action is required. If leaked, the Offi ce of Foreign Relations
recommends that a position of not commenting on the details of US intelligence activities

be maintained. DUE: NLT 31 July 2001

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
89

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

11. (C) F act of geographic areas of DSD, GCHQ, and CSE TEXTA a uthori ty;
Compromise of GCHQ RAS I N Manual ^W orking Aid; CSE Telegraphic Codes M
DSD document on AN/ULQ-16 Operations at Kangaroo 95 (ADF

exercise)

Act ion. (S//SI) The Office of F oreign Relations will request via email that NSA i

country representatives advise these Second P arty partners of these compromises.

further action is required. DUE. 31 J uly 2001

anual;

No

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
90

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

A

ppendix

D

(U) D

estruct i o n

Testin

g

P rocedures

(C) This appendix provides the destruction testing procedures used in an attempt
to recreate the crews destruction of three pieces of equipment: the SCARAB computer,

which was loaded with the LUNCHBOX PROFORMA system, the MARTES laptop, and

the COMINT S upervisors laptop. Conclusions drawn from the testing are also
discusse d.

I. (U//FOUO) General Practices

a.	An A berdeen Test Center staff member served as the Test Director.

b.	The T est Director will instrument and measure the shock inflicted on the
devices under test (DUT) as well as possible given the size of the different
devices and the severity of the destruction. A video record will be captured of
the tests.

c.	Th e physical structures involved in the destruction (the floor, chairs, tabletops)
have been recreated. Some care has been taken to assure that the DUT s will not
fly off the test platforms and benefit from any unintended shock.

d.	At each juncture of the test, the computer hard disks will be replaced with fresh
disks to determine at what point most damage was inflicted. The disks will be
returned for analysis immediately following the test. At that time, a preliminary
examination will determine if the disks will be viable for recovery.

II. (C) SCARAB Com puter

e.	For the SCARAB re-creation, we have procured a single SCARAB computer.
We have a series of four tests to perform on the SCARAB, and will have to
perform them on the same housing, although we will be trading out disks at
various stages of the test.

f.	The SCARAB will never be powered up during the test sequence.

g.	Th ere will be a series of accelerated drop tests performed in the following

manner:

i. The DUT will be manually lifted to approximately 5ft and sent to the
floor with positive force. Th e exact amount of force will be hard to
duplicate but will be measured by the instrumentation.
ii. After the first drop, the computer disk will be removed and replaced.

iii.	Th en a series of four accelerated drops will be performed, after which
the computer disk will be removed.

iv.	Th en repeat the single and quad drops, totaling four tests (four disks for
analysis).

v. If at anytime the SCARAB i s damaged to the point that similar
mechanical stresses cannot be re-created, the testing will cease.

In each of the accelerated drop tests, the SCARAB will always land on its
bottom or back edge. In particular, the first drop will land on the bottom edge
where the removable drive is mounted.

h

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
91

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

i. Th e test will not attempt to recreate the kicking that occurred betw een drops.
j. The following hard drives will be used in the following sequences:

Test — 1
Test - 2
Test - 3

Seagate MEDALIST ST34520W; S#AYQ30730
Seagate MEDALIST ST34520W; S#AYS24316
Seagate MEDALIST ST34520W; S#AYS55957

III.	(C) MARTES L aptop — Tadpole Ultrabook IIi

k.	For the POS20 i aptop re-creation, we have traded new Tadpole Ultrabook
laptops for used inventory, which were of the same generation as the computer
in question. Record the laptop serial number and identity of each of the hard
disks, noting which disks are used for each of the two tests. There are two disks
in the Tadpole. Refer to disk1 as the disk closest to the front left side, and disk2
as the disk in the middle left of the computer. Note disk1 will be the bootable

disk and disk2 will be a “data” disk.

i.	Laptop S# U40-1347

ii.	Test-1; I lard disk 1 S# GZLE1332

iii.	Test-1; Hard disk 2 S# GZLE8015

iv.	Test-2; Hard disk 1 S# GZLD6396

v.	Test-2; Hard disk 2 S# GZLE4022

l.	Th ere are two basic tests that will be performed on one of the laptops. The
second laptop will be held in spare as well as used to verify the operation of the
disks after they have been tested and analyzed for the purposes of recovery.

m.	Th e laptop will have been powered-on, and the lid closed with a user logged
into the computer, for five minutes prior to the recreation. The intent is to allow
the computer to reach any suspended state, which would have occurred after the
laptop lid had closed and other activities had taken place.

n.	Test sequence:

i. Tabletop drop to the floor after bouncing off the seat of a chair.

ii. Replace the hard disks.

iii.	Leaning the closed laptop against a simulated chair rail, where the laptop
is the hypotenuse of a triangle formed with the floor and the chair rail.
Bottom of the laptop touching the rail.

iv.	Stomp with one foot on the keyboard until the laptop is broken into
pieces. Should be performed by person weighing 180 to 200 pounds.

v. Remove the hard disks for analysis.

IV.	(C) COMINT Sup ervisor s Laptop — Gateway Solo 2500

o.	For the POIC i aptop re-creation, we have procured two refurbished Gateway
Solo 2550 l a ptops. Th ey differ in a few areas such as processor speed and

nt of RAM. T he battery, floppy, and hard disk are mounted in the same

amoun

locations on the test systems as with the fielded system, but are secured in
slightly difference fashion. Specifically, it is described that with the removal of
the single screw visible on the bottom surface of the laptop, the hard disk can

slide from the side of the Solo 2500. Thi s same action on the Solo 2550 only

removes a plastic cover and requires the removal of two more screws before the
drive will slide out. This is not expected to have much of an impact on the

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
92

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

re-creation, but it is likely to prevent the hard disk from coming loose during the
stomping tests.

p.	Record the laptop serial number and identity of each of the hard disks, noting
which disks are used for each of the two tests.

i.	Laptop S# B2500380397

ii.	Test-1; Hard disk S# T607E59247

iii.	Test-2; Hard disk S# 5J08870645

q.	There are two basic tests that will be performed on one of the laptops. The
second laptop will be held in spare as well as used to verify the operation of the
disks after they have been tested and analyzed for the purposes of recovery.

r.	Th e laptop will have been powered-on, and the lid open with a user logged into
the computer, for five minutes prior to the recreation. The intent is to allow the
computer to reach any suspended state, which would have occurred after the
laptop flipped into one of the F-racks and other activities had taken place.

s.	Test sequence:

i. Hold the laptop with the keyboard side facing down. The screen will
then be hit on the surface of a table top (face down) with the desired
effect to crack the spine leaving the screen bent approximately
25 degrees past the horizontal position.

ii. Replace the hard disk.

iii.	Drop the laptop to the chair rails, face up, such that the back of the
display is on one chair rail and the bottom of the laptop is on the other.

iv.	Stomp with one foot on the keyboard until the laptop is broken into
pieces. Should be performed by person weighing 180 to 200 pounds.

v. Remove the hard disk for analysis.

V. (C) R esults and Conclusions

(C) G enerally, results from the re-created destruction tests revealed the difficulty
of disabling a computer system with shock by dropping, stomping, or striking the
equipment. F or each of the three systems tested, results did not damage the computers
enough to conclude that data recovery was impossible. This underscores the importance
of providing clear instructions and training for how to physically destroy computers.

(C) In the end, the EP-3 T eam relied on the examination of the recovered
computers from the returned EP-3E aircraft as the primary basis for estimating the
recoverability of data. Results from the destruction tests were used as supporting data.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
93

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

A

ppendix

E

(U) EP-3E Radio

E

quipment and

N etw orks

(U) R adio Equipment

(U) T he EP-3E is equipped with a variety of radio transmitter/receivers

(tra nsceivers) .

(U//FOUO) Two AN/ARC-94 HF radios are provided for long-range

communication. One (HF-1) i s configured for secure modem communications and is
encrypted using a KG-84C encryption device. The other (HF-2) is configured for voice
communications and can be encrypted using a KYV-5 encryption de

evice.

(U//FOUO) Three AN/ARC-206 radios are provided for UHF line-of-sight
communications. UHF-1 and UHF-2 are controlled by the SEVAL and are configured
for voice communications. Both can be encrypted using KY-58 encryption devices. A
third AN/ARC-206 radio is configured for line-of-sight datalink operations.

(U//FOUO) Two AN/ARC-182 radios are provided for VHF or UHF line-of-sight

ications. Both are controlled from the flight station and are configured for voice
ications. Both can be encrypted using KY-58 encryption devices. The control
units for these radios have a switch setting allowing an easy and immediate change to the

emergency frequency (243.0 MH z or 121.5 MHz) associated with the frequency band in

use. A separate switch setting overrides the selected frequency band and tunes directly to

243.0 MHz.

communi

communi

(U//FOUO) One LST-5 satellite radio is provided for secure UHF voice satellite

communications. The radio can only be controlled locally at its location in an avionics
bay inside the aircraft cabin. It is encrypted using a KY-58 encryption device.

(U//FOUO) The OL-390 D igital C ommunications Group and its associated UHF

radio are used for secure satellite modem communications. The radio is controlled by the
secure communications operator and is encrypted using a KG-84A encryption device.
This radio shares distribution and antenna equipment with the LST-5; simultaneous
transmission using both radios is not possible.

(U) Radio N etw orks

(S) The Global High Frequency System (GHFS) is a worldwide network of high-
power HF stations that provides air/ground HF command and control radio
communications between ground agencies and U.S. military aircraft. The GHFS network
supports SRO aircraft by passing encoded NICKELBACK advisory conditions, position
reports and administrative traffic.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
94

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(S) T he P acific Tributary Network (PTN) is a UHF secure voice satellite network
that provides COMINT advisory support and threat warning to U.S. and allied forces in
the theater. Net participants include the Pacific Reconnaissance Operations Center

(PACROC) , which provides coordination and flight following to SRO aircraft, KRSOC,

and NSOC/SSA.

(S) T he SENSOR PACER network is a UHF secure low data-rate digital satellite
network that provides time-sensitive SIGINT reporting, COMINT advisory support,
threat warning, and administrative traffic support to SRO assets worldwide. Net
participants include KRSOC and the Tactical SIGINT I nteraction Center at Kadena AB,
Okinawa (TSIC-K).

(S) T he SIERRA ONE Early W arning network is a UHF secure voice satellite
network utilized by 5th and 7th F leet P-3's and EP-3E 's for tactical reporting and
coordination. Net participants include all PACOM T actical Support Centers (TSC) and

CTF 57/72, Kami Seya, Japan.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
95

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
Appendix F (U) Schematic of EP-3E with Position Identifications

Pilot
(Mission
Commander)

Secure

Communications
Operator

Prop plane

ELINT Operator

ELINT Operator

Lab Operator

Radar Operator

ELINT Evaluator

Senior Evaluator (SEVAL)

COMINT Evaluator (COMEVAL)

* COMEVAL trainee
Port

Overwing Hatch

Boarding Ladder

Entry Door ^
S & T Operator

* 3rd Pilot
* 2nd Flight Engineer

Ditching Stations 21 & 22

Co-Pilot
Flight Engineer

* ELINT Operator trainee
Navigator

Record Station

* indicates stations
for takeoff
and landing

Starboard
Overwing Hatch

COMINT Supervisor

* In-Flight Technician
Ditching Station 23 & 24
Galley

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

96

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

A

ppendix

G

(U) Other Tactical SIGINT P la tfo t

(S//SI) EP-3 Cryptologic Assessment Team members visited several locations to
gather data from other tactical SIGINT collection platforms and activities concerning
their material accounting and destruction procedures. Th e visits focused on gaining
insights into best practices for risk mitigation in the day-to-day conduct of tactical
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) missions. Units visited included:

U.S. Air Force RC-135 COBRA BALL/COMBAT SENT/RIVET JOINT (Ofutt AFB,

NE); U.S. Army RC-7 ARL (Ft Bliss, TX); U.S. naval surface and subsurface assets
(Norfolk Naval Base, VA); U.S. Air F orce Special Operations assets (Hurlburt F ield,
FL), U.S. Army Special Operations assets (Ft Bragg, NC); and U.S. Marine Corps assets
(Camp Lejeune, NC).

(U) RC-7 (U.S. Army)

(S) RC-7 A irborne Reconnaissance Low (ARL) mission aircraft include
ARLCommu nications (ARL-C) and ARL M ultifunction (ARL-M) variants. ARL

missions are conducted in threat environment similar to that of the EP-3E. ARL mission
crews employ Emergency Destruction Procedures (EDP) developed specifically for each
aircraft configuration. Th e focus of these procedures is to mitigate potential loss of
classified information in the event of an emergency landing.

(U//FOUO) The RC-7 Mission Su

(MS)

Supervisor (MS) is the designated authority for
determining mission essential materials and inventories all mission materials brought
onboard. The MS inventories the mission materials again after returning to the SCIF
from the mission aircraft. A copy of the inventory is kept in the M ission Operations area

I AW USSID 3.

(S) ARL collection operators are assigned consistent emergency destruction areas
of responsibility based on assigned positions. Prior to each mission, the MS addresses
individual rules of engagement and EDP areas of responsibility. Supervision of the EDP

is the responsibility of the non-rated Mission Supervisor IAW the Mission Supervisors’

Checklist for the particular mission aircraft. The MS EDP checklist is accessible at every
position. W hen the EDP execution command is given, each operator complies with
his/her responsibilities as listed in their individual checklist. When respective actions are
completed, each operator informs the MS, who is responsible for notifying the flight
deck.

(U) RC-135 (U.S. Air Force)

(U//FOUO) RC-135 aircraft conduct operations similar to the EP-3E, on JCS-
approved SRO tracks. There are 21 total RC-135’s in three variants: RIVET JOINT,
with a primary SIGINT mission; COMBAT SENT, with a primary technical ELINT
mission; and COBRA BALL, with a primary FISINT mission. All platforms carry

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
97

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) data. Due to the proximity of these
missions to unfriendly territory, RC-135 mission crews must carry out EDP in the event
of aircraft loss, force down or damage. Emergency Destruction is ordered by the pilot
(aircraft commander), lead electronic warfare officer (tactical controller (TC)) , or
airborne mission supervisor (AMS). O nce destruction is initiated, aircrew members use
their position checklists, which identify their respective responsibilities. Air Intelligence
Agency (AIA) personnel (COMINT operators and COMINT systems maintenance)
receive EDP familiarization during operator upgrade training. The Air C ombat
Command (ACC) personnel (pilots, navigators and electronic warfare officers) do not
receive any standard EDP training.

(U//FOUO) Accountability for RC-135 mission materials is rigorous. For the
COMINT compartment, the AMS verifies the inventory, signs a material receipt and files
copies IAW USSID 3. After the mission, the materials are inventoried once by the AMS

prior to departing the aircraft and again by the ground personnel when the materials are
dropped off at the SCIF. CAT III materials may also be included on the mission

ntory, but only if the AMS agrees they are required for the mission. For the ELINT
partment, the TC inventories and signs for the mission materials three times: prior to

inve

com

departure, before deplaning after the mission, and again when the materials are returned

to the SCIF. ACC materials are generally non- SCI in nature.

(U//FOUO) RC-135 EDP is divided into two phases: preliminary and complete.

During preliminary destruction, all non-essential materials (e.g., back-up discs, technical
orders, tapes that have been recorded on) are destroyed. Hardcopy paper material is torn
into small pieces and placed into any available containers in preparation for jettisoning.
During complete destruction, the AMS executes a software command to initiate a disk
overwrite process for all disks loaded in drives. Other crewmembers zeroize
cryptographic equipment. Shredded paper material is jettisoned from the mission aircraft
via the safest available window/hatch during complete destruction. Th roughout EDP,
crewmembers adhere to strict crew coordination standards. The AMS reports verbally
over the aircraft intercom system to the TC and AC as each step of destruction is
completed. Safety of the aircrew takes precedence over emergency destruction IAW Air

Force Instruction (AFI) 11-202 Volume 3.

(C) A problem with the disk overwrite process is that it takes approximately three
hours to complete. The goal is to decrease the time to less than 30 mi nutes.

(C) EDP is briefed prior to each mission. Each crewmember is directed to review
their position checklist to become familiar with tasked responsibilities. Completion of
survival courses, including special survival training (SV-83) geared towards unplanned
detention situations, is mandatory for all RC-135 crewmembers. F urthermore, all
COMINT crewmembers are tested in Ad visory Support and Emergency P rocedures every
six months. EDP drills are not conducted prior to launch nor while airborne. F inally, the
AIA has minimized classified paper holdings in favor of media storage.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
98

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(U) U.S. Air F orce Special Operations C

omman

d (AFSOC) S tandard P rocedu

(C) AFSOC uses a Direct Support Operator (DSO) to provide direct threat
warning to the supported aircrew. The DSO is normally the only SCI- indoctrinated
aircrew member on AFSOC aircraft. The DSO carries a standard complement of
materials, which are minimized by the station commander IAW USSID 3. The DSO
accounts for and signs for sensitive equipment, which includes one UNCLASSIFIED,
and one SECRET laptop. Additionally, the DSO carries a crypto storage device and one
technical working aid, which is limited to SECRET information on water-soluble paper.

(S) Although the support afforded by the DSO includes an SCI collection and
analysis process, no SCI data is actually placed in soft or hard copy materials. Al so, only
sanitized SECRET reporting is passed from the DSO to the supported crew.

(C) In an emergency situation, the DSO zeroizes all crypto devices, clears his
laptop computers, destroys the hard drives of both laptops using a 9MM handgun or an
axe, and adds water to the water soluble papers of the technical working aid.

(U) U.S. A rmy Special Operations Command (USASOC) S tandard P rocedures

(C) USASOC subordinated Special Forces Group (SFG) SIGINT assets deploy

forward to provide threat warning for force protection of SFG el ements. Collection
elements deploy as a 5-person foot patrol team and all intercept equipment and associated

materials are hauled via ba ckpack. As such, they employ a “less is best” configuration

and minimize crypto and technical data loads. Special Operation Team Bravo (SOT-B)
teams establish a Tactical SCIF (T-SCIF) well behind the front line of defense. SOT-B
T-SCIF authorities carry only the minimum crypto, tech data, and hard copy materials
necessary for the mission at hand. Collection team leaders and T-SCIF S pecial Security
Offi cers (SSO) are the designated authorities to monitor classified holdings and are
responsible for minimizing classified materials.

(U//FOUO) When enemy contact is probable, team members zeroize all non-
essential equipment (radios and crypto), destroy classified material and initiate egress
operati ons. The preferred method for rapid destruction is thermite grenade.

(U) U.S. Mar ine Corps Standard P rocedures

(S) The M arine Expeditionary Forces (MEF) employ Radio B atta lions (RADBN)
to conduct SIGINT operations to provide direct threat warning for force protection.
RADBN personnel use a variety of configurations in both vehicle- and foot-based
operations. Radio equipment is tailored to the specific mission and technical data is
minimized due to operations in close proximity to enemy lines. SCI used by forward
teams is normally limited to one cheat sheet and team leaders, as the designated deployed
authority, prefer that these sheets be sanitized to the collateral SECRET level. A copy of
mission material inventories is left at the headquarters location. The RADBN
commander has overall authority to determine materials brought on a deployment.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
99

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

(U//FOUO) When H igh Mobility W heeled Vehicles (HMMWVs)

are used, they

are configured for the particular mission and the teams carry minimal crypto, technical
data and hard copy materials. Radio Reconnaissance Teams (RRTs) travel on foot and
use backpacks for all intercept equipment and associated materials. As such, they

employ a “less is best” configuration. During ship borne operations, the RADBN

personnel team with U.S. N avy operators and follow the applicable EAP for the
respective ship.

(U//FOUO) If enemy contact is probable, team members zeroize all non-essential
equipment (radios and crypto) while executing egress operations. If enemy attack is
imminent, then all classified equipment, to include the vehicle would be destroyed using
thermite grenades.

(U) N aval Surface Vessel Standard P rocedures

(S) All SCI material aboard U.S. N avy surface assets will be confined to
authorized areas. For augmenting cryptologic personnel, the Operations Officer of the
supporting Naval Security Group Acti vity (NSGA) determines what mission materials

can be deployed. Additionally, the ship’s Commanding Officer (CO) can place limits on

the materials embarked.

(U//FOUO) If the situation warrants, the ship’s CO or his/her designee will direct

activation of the EDP. The EDP is conducted in three phases: preliminary destruction,
precautionary destruction, and total destruction. Destruction procedures are outlined on
EDP cards, maintained at the watch officer desk. Th e cards are passed out to duty
personnel, who follow the prioritized destruction guidelines.

(U//FOUO) The ship’s CMS Custodian is responsible for reviewing EDP cards

periodically and for ensuring that appropriate emergency destruction tools are available
and serviceable.

(U) N aval Subsurface Standard Procedures

(S) U.S. Navy subsurface assets may or may not embark an NSG SIGINT
collection contingent. W hen NSG personnel participate in subsurface operations, the
Operations Officer of the supporting NSGA determines what mission materials can be
deployed. Due to extremely limited space considerations, the submarine CO may furthe
restrict materials brought onboard. Submarine operations are generally confined to a
smaller operations area, facilitating a more condensed SCI material inventory for
accomplishment. An inventory of supporting NSGA SCI materials is maintained at their
respective units.

mission

(U//FOUO) If the situation warrants, the Commanding Offi cer or his designee
will direct activation of the EDP. NSGA personnel will destroy their materials using
shredders, axes, and sledgehammers, where appropriate.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
100

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

A

ppendix

H

(U) Crisis

Re sponse

I nterviews

(U//FOUO) T

eam members conducted interviews with the followi

NSA

USMC

NSOC Chief,

NSOC D/Chief,

SSA, LtCol
SID/DDAP

SID/Chief, Office of China
SID/Chief, China Military Division

SOO,

NSOC C/S,	(EP-3 desk)

NSOC Dep C/S,	(EP-3 desk

SID/DDDA -

SID/Re porting Policy
SID/Office of China, Reporting Policy

LAO,

PAO,

M

risis Manager

(Cha

PACOM CINCPAC Dep J2
CINCPAC J28,
CINCPACFLT N2,
CINCPACFLT N3DC

Joint Recce Center
Joint Recce Center
J284, C ollection Operations,
NCPAC, Charlie Meals
NCPAC Ops Chief,

NCPAC IAD Chief,

CSG Hawai

USA

KRSOC	Commander

Dep C/S,

J3, LtCol^z, USAF
J3 OPS, LT

USN

Acting A/S for INR,
DAS for INR,

State/ INR,

State/ INR,

State/ INR,

NCR State,

Asia Desk

S

tate

ng individuals.

CMSG)

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
101

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

P entagon

JCS J2, RADM |
JCS J2M, CAPT
DUSD(PS)

DNI, RADM

NCR Defense,

CSG,

J38, Col

USAF

White House NSC I ntel Director, I

Deputy Director, Situation Ro

CIA

DDCI MA, Lt Ge

ADC I Collection,
D/ADCI Anal & Prod,

C

ong ress

SSCI
, HPSCI
, HPSCI
HPSCI

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
102

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

A ppendix

(U//FOUO) EP-3 Cryptologic

Assess ment

T

eam

M

embers

Co-L

eads

Ml em bers

NSA

NSG

LT
CTA2
Lt Col

LCDR

SMSGT

LT

USN

USN
, USAF

USN
, USAF

USN

Oversight

ONI

NSG

NSA

NSA

INSCOM

NSA

NSA

Patrol and

NSA

AFCO

NSA

NSA

NSG

R

econna

ssa nce

W

ng TEN

RADM

USN

Commander

NSG

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
103

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

A

ppendix

J

(U) EP-3 I ncident Assess ment and Review
Terms of Reference

4 May 2001

1. (U//FOUO) E

xecutive Issu e

> Th is document outlines the Terms of Reference for a SIGINT and Information
Assurance damage assessment and incident review of the EP-3E/F-8-II collision
on 1 April 2001 , as directed by the Chief, Naval Operations (CNO) and the
Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service (DIRNSA).

2. (U//FOUO) Backgr

> T he collision incident requires a comprehensive, fully coordinated, end-to-end
damage assessment, including a review of emergency procedures and actions,
development of lessons learned, and recommendations for corrective action,
where appropriate.

3. (S//SI) O

verview

>	Structure. O verall incident assessment and review to be conducted at

COMNAVSECGRU HQ , Fort M eade, MD by a multi-organizational team co_
chaired by Navy and the National Security Agency (NSA). The EP-3
Cryptologic Assessment Team will be comprised of two working groups.
Group One will be led by NSA and tasked with conducting damage
assessment and review of the Cryptologic system response and procedures.
Group two will be led by the Navy and tasked with review and assessment of
emergency destruction, classified material accountability, communications
and connectivity and emergency procedures.

>	Me m bership. M embers will be both core and extended. Core members will
be detailed to the working groups for the duration of the assessment.

Extended members will interface virtually or in person as appropriate.

COMNAVSECGRU will oversee the effort on behalf of the CNO and the

DIRNSA.

>	F inal Re port. The team will produce a final report including an incident
summary, a complete list of what was compromised and the impact of that
loss, lessons learned, and near-, mid-, and long-term recommendations for
improvement to include proposed action agencies and timelines. The team

will update COMNAVSECGRU on at least a weekly basis and will provide
Congress, Defense, and Intelligence Community components updates as
required.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
104

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

4. (S//SI) Working Groups

> W orking Group composition and focus areas.

Group 1A Lead: NSA (SIGINT D ire ctorate)

T

asking:

embers:

SIGINT damage assessment and review of SIGINT system crisis response

NSA (SID), Navy, CINCPAC, NCPAC, KRSOC, Service Cryptologic

Elements (SCEs)

Focus Areas:

(1)	SIGINT Equipment and Techniques: Loss and damage

(2)	SIGINT technical information exposure: Loss and damage

(3)	Crisis response procedures

(4)	Communications/connectivity

(5)	Information management and dissemination

(6)	Cross-organization and agency coordination

(7)	F oreign partner impacts

(8)	Damage M iti gati on

(9)	Collection/analysis strategy to confirm loss/damage assessment,
including initial observations of target activities

Group 1B Lead'. NSA (IA D irectorate)

T

asking:

IA d

amage assessment and review

of Cry ptol o

laterial System (CMS)

equipment, medium protection capabilities, and procedures.

NSA (IAD), SCEs

Members:

Focus Areas:

(1)	IA information: Loss and damage

(2)	T echnical information: Loss and damage

(3)	Crisis response procedures

(4)	Information management and dissemination

(5)	Cross-organization and agency coordination

(6)	Damage mitigation

(7)	Collection/analysis strategy to confirm loss/damage assessment
Group T L ead. Navy

Tasking:	Review emergency destruction, Classified material accountability and

documentation, communications and connectivity (internal/external), and
emergency procedures.

Members:	Navy (OPNAV, CINCPAC, CINPACFLT, ONI), NSA(SID/IAD),

NAVAIR, COMPATRECONFORPAC, SCEs

Focus Areas:

(1) C lassified M aterial Accountability and Documentation

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
105

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

-	Req uirements

-	Procedures (accountability/control)

-	Equipment

-	Hardcopy material

-	Softcopy material

-	Configuration management

(2) E mergency Destruction

-	Req uirements

-	P rocedures (priorities, methods, tools, equipment)

-	Equipment and capabilities

-	Technical improvements and requirements for future systems

(3)	Communications and connectivity

(4)	E mergency Procedures

-	Flights

-	SRO

-	NATOPS

Ai

rcrew coordination

5. (U) Inter! m D

nteri m D elivera bles

^ Outline of Report (to CNO and DIRNSA).

^	^Weekly feedback and periodic status reports (CNO, CINCPAC,

CINCPACFLT, DIRNSA, DOD, and the I ntelligence Community).

6. (U//FOUO) Final Report

> T he final report, with an Executive Summary and briefing, will be delivered to

the CNO and DIRNSA. It will include a:

□

□

□

□

□

□

Summary of the incident from collision to repatriation
Damage assessment of SIGINT and IA equipment, techniques,
and information compromised

Review and assessment of operational activities

Counterintelligence assessment

Review of SIGINT and IA crisis response

Consolidated lessons learned and near-, mid-, and long-term
recommendations, including action agencies and deliverable
timelines

7. (U//FOUO) Timeline M

>	Offic	ial start of	Assessment Team	27 April
>	Draft	and coord	inate Terms of Reference	27 April
>	Data	gathering,	to include TDY for crew debriefs	27 April -1 June

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
106

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1

>	Re lease final Terms of Reference

>	R elease outline of report

>	I ntegration of team inputs, drafting of final report

>	R elease draft final report for coordination, review

>	Brief CNO and DIRNSA on report

>	F inal report issued; Team stand down

4 May

11	May
4-19 June
20 June
Week of 25 Ju

12	July

8. (U//FOUO) Consi deratio

>	T eam/group composition must balanced in size and expertise.

>	I nformation must be managed to avoid premature disclosure and to protect the
fact finding process.

>	“Protected” lists of authorized recipients will be created to guide dissemination

for each team and overall assessment. Release of information beyond the list of

authorized recipients will be controlled by CNO and DIRNSA.

>	F ollow-on information requirements for the EP-3E crew can be anticipated.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//NOFORN//X1
107