Case No: CO/11732/2013

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
DIVISIONAL COURT

BETWEEN:

R (DAVID MIRANDA)

Claimant

and

SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
COMMISSIONER OF POLICE OF THE METROPOLIS

Defendants

APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL

1.	The Claimant seeks permission to appeal against the Divisional Court’s judgment
dismissing his application for judicial review. The First Defendant and Second
Defendant have both indicated that they adopt a neutral position to this application.

2.	The Divisional Court granted the Claimant permission to seek judicial review on the
basis that: “The issues which the claim raises are of substantial importance." In a
number of areas the case and the judgment raise novel issues and give rise to a
number of points of law of general public importance which warrant consideration
by the Court of Appeal. These include:

(a)	The applicability of the O’Hara principle to the exercise of police powers
under Schedule 7. It is a well established principle at common law and
under the ECHR that the assessment of the legality of police powers of arrest
must be undertaken exclusively by reference to the state of mind of the
arresting officer (see O’Hara v Chief Constable of Royal Ulster Constabulary
[1997] AC 286; O’Hara v United Kingdom (2002) 34 EHRR 32). In the present
case, the Divisional Court appears to have adopted a different approach in

1 Judgment, paragraph 15

1

relation to determining the purpose for which powers were used by examining
officers pursuant to Schedule 7. This court has held that it was not confined
to a consideration of the examining officers’ subjective state of mind, or
personal knowledge, but was entitled to aggregate the knowledge and
intentions of a number of different individuals. Unusually, this also included
material that was deliberately withheld from the very officers who exercised
the Schedule 7 power by detaining the Claimant. If this analysis is right, it is
an approach not clear in existing authorities. It has significant consequences
for the lawful use of executive powers where more than one officer is involved
in the decision to exercise those powers. It also would represent a new
interpretation of the approach to determining the purpose of executive action,
beyond that which is set out in the case of R v Southwark Crown Court, ex
parte Bowles [1998] AC 641. Accordingly, this is an important point that
merits further consideration by the Court of Appeal.

(b)	The definition of terrorism and the requirement for cogent reasons to
justify the exercise of Schedule 7 powers. The Divisional Court considered
that an analysis of DS Stokley’s reasoning supported its conclusion that
Schedule 7 powers were exercised lawfully against the Claimant. This raises
two important legal issues:

(i)	First, whether DS Stokley adopted the correct understanding of the
definition of ‘terrorism’ under s 1 TACT, insofar as he considered
that the risk of publication of articles similar to those that had
already been published could constitute terrorism. It is axiomatic
that if DS Stokely had acted on the risk posed by the publication of
articles that could not, in law, constitute terrorism, his approach
would have been flawed. This is an important question regarding
the scope of the definition of ‘terrorism’ and its potential application
to journalistic activities.

(ii)	Second, the reliance on DS Stokley’s reasoning gives rise to an
important issue regarding the cogency of reasoning necessary to
justify the use of Schedule 7 powers. There appears to have been
no evidential basis for DS Stokley’s view that the risk of a ‘Russian
threat’ justified the use of Schedule 7 powers against the Claimant.
Whether, and if so in what circumstances, Schedule 7 powers may
be exercised on the basis of unreasoned or speculative
assessments of the facts is a matter of significant importance. It is a
point that has significance under all three of the principal issues:
purpose, proportionality, compatibility.

2

(c)	The compatibility of Schedule 7 of TACT with Articles 5 and 8 of the
ECHR. In Beghal v DPP [2014] 2 WLR 150 the Divisional Court held that
Schedule 7 was compatible with Articles 5 and 8 ECHR and certified these
issues as points of law of general public importance. In the present case,
Laws LJ rejected identical arguments concerning these Convention rights on
the basis that Beghal was correctly decided and that “[n]o complaint relating
to Article 5 or 8 can survive my agreement with [that judgment]'. On 6
February 2014, the Supreme Court granted the appellant permission to
appeal on the certified questions in Beghal. The compatibility of Schedule 7
with Articles 5 and 8 is therefore a matter of general public importance that
will shortly receive detailed consideration by the highest appellate court.

(d)	The compatibility of Schedule 7 of TACT with Article 10 of the ECHR.

The Divisional Court in Beghal did not consider the compatibility of Schedule
7 with Article 10. It was the Claimant’s submission, supported by the
interveners, that Article 10 brings an important further dimension to any
analysis of the compatibility of Schedule 7 with the Convention. The
compatibility of Schedule 7 with Article 10 has not been considered by any
appellate court and is not an explicit issue in the Beghal appeal. It is an issue
of general public importance with significant implications for all individuals
involved in journalism who travel through UK ports and airports. In the same
way that the Supreme Court has granted permission to appeal in the Beghal
case in relation to Articles 5 and 8, it would be desirable for an appellate court
to consider how such submissions relate to Article 10.

(e)	The interpretation of Schedule 5 of TACT. The Divisional Court held that
the material seized from the Claimant could not have been obtained under
Schedule 5 TACT. This conclusion appears to be based on the suggestion
that the material included ‘stolen’ raw data which fell outside the broad
language of s 13(1) of PACE (Judgment, paragraph 64). However Laws LJ
added that, ‘the point is not straightforward, given the proposition (which I
have accepted) that there are cases where the law should protect stolen
material’. This is a novel point of law in relation to the interpretation of
Schedule 5 and the definition of ‘journalistic material’ under PACE. This also
appears to be an important point raised in this case for the first time and
which this Court had to determine without the benefit of clear authority. It has
potentially far-reaching implications regarding the circumstances in which
material may be obtained under Schedule 5. The Claimant respectfully
submits that these issues would benefit from further clarification by the Court
of Appeal.

3

(f)	The seizure of journalistic material without prior judicial authorisation.

To the extent that Schedule 5 was incapable of being used by the Defendants
to obtain the material seized from the Claimant, the case raises an important
question as to whether the requirement for prior judicial authorisation for the
seizure of material from individuals involved in journalistic activities may be
avoided by Schedule 7. The Claimant submits that this court appears to have
taken a different approach to that adopted by the European Court of Human
Rights in relation to ‘prior judicial authorisation’ (see, for example, the
judgment of the Grand Chamber in Sanoma Utigevers BV v The Netherlands
Application No. 38224/03(2010) 51 EHRR 31). This is a novel point of law
that warrants consideration by an appellate court.

(g)	The correct approach to the four-stage proportionality analysis
expounded by the Supreme Court. In Bank Mellatt v Her Majesty’s
Treasury (No. 2) [2013] UKSC 39 Lord Sumption identified four separate
steps that courts must consider when assessing the proportionality of
particular state action. The fourth requirement is ‘whether...a fair balance has
been struck between the rights of the individual and the interests of the
community’. This principle is of some importance in this case. The Court, in
particular the judgment of Laws LJ at paragraph 46 appears to have
questioned the suitability of this criterion, warning that, ‘there is a real
difficulty in distinguishing this from a political question to be decided by the
elected arm of the government’. Insofar as this Court appears to have taken a
different approach to proportionality than that of the Supreme Court, this case
raises an important issue as to how Court’s should assess the balance
between the rights of the individual and the interests of the community. This
is potentially relevant to a wide class of litigation and affects all cases
involving qualified Convention rights.

3.	The Claimant submits that the unusual public importance of the points raised in this
judgment, as well as the exceptional nature of the case, have been recognised by
this Court. In that context the judgment raises a number of important and novel
issues. The interventions and submissions of Liberty, English Pen, Article 19,
Media Law Defence Initiative and the Coalition of Media & Free Speech
Organisations also reflect the general public importance of the issues raised in this
case. The exercise of Schedule 7 powers against the Claimant was discussed in
Parliament and will be the subject of a review by the Independent Reviewer of
Terrorism Legislation. The President of the Supreme Court and the former Lord
Chief Justice have expressed ‘concern’ about the ‘substantial intrusive powers’
conferred under Schedule 7, in particular ‘the fact that the powers are so

4

unrestricted’ and ‘not subject to any controls’ (R v Gul [2013] UKSC 64). In these
circumstances, this case falls into the exceptional category where this Court should
grant permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal so that the issues may be
clarified further.

4.	For these reasons, the Claimant asks the Court to grant permission to appeal to the
Court of Appeal.

Matthew Ryder QC
Edward Craven
18 February 2014

5