DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(S//SI) RebA Awards Contract for 'Integrated Analytic Environment'
of the Future
FROM:
Program Manager for Rebuilding Analysis (S211R)
Run Date: 04/27/2005

Plans for an improved suite of tools for SIGINT analysts (U)
(U) SIGINT analysts: did you know that the Rebuilding Analysis (RebA) Program is currently
working hard to create a less time consuming and hopefully better way for you to perform
analysis?
(U//FOUO) RebA has awarded a two year Rebuilding Analysis Development and Integration
Contract (or RADIC) to build a near state-of-the art Integrated Analytic Environment (IAE).
(U//FOUO) The IAE will be the operational platform supporting and providing access to virtually
all of the applications used by production analysts. The first iteration of the IAE, which is known
as Increment 1 in NSA acquisition terminology, will contain the basic analytic tools most of you
use today. It will be on your desktop, at NSA Washington, in late 2006. Some lucky folks, known
as "early adopters," have volunteered to work with the IAE and its embedded applications well
before that time to ensure that the developers and RebA get it right.
(S//SI) The key feature of the IAE is its suite of common desktop applications and services
accessible via a single sign-on. Within the IAE, you will be able to personalize your desktop
applications to fit your needs. No matter where you log-in, they will be available to you with the
same look and feel. Among the capabilities contained within the IAE are:
a query service,
information viewing applications,
an event tracking and session management service,
the ability to click-to-send,
a target knowledge database update service,
a collaboration tool suite, and
multiple viewers, such as metadata, network graph, timeline, geospatial data, and 2D/3D
graphical data viewers.
(S//SI) Also included will be workflow and data mediation, logging, auditing and personalization
services, as well as native font handling. Standard language dictionary, machine translation, and
transcription services are also included in the IAE, as well as SIGDev Learning Portal access,
SIGINT-On-Demand reporting and authoring services, and information need and tasking analysis
services. There are many other corporate services that will be available as well. In addition,
RebA is building into the IAE a target dossier capability featuring six windows to view various
aspects of target activity (detailed, social network, communications, travel, financial and
network views). All of these will interact with the target knowledge base.
(U//FOUO) The IAE doesn't end with Increment 1 deliverables. The basic IAE will be enhanced
and upgraded in an Increment 2 delivery that will be released to production analysts in the latter
half of 2008. Many new analytic discovery applications will be available to you, such as
hypothesis mapping, advanced analytics to discover patterns and anomalies, enumerate
behaviors, provide target simulations, support SIGINT development and language analysis, and
to learn and apply best practices from your previous analysis and automate your workflow.
These applications are scheduled to be available at the desktop to analysts at NSAW and at
many analytic centers throughout the extended SIGINT enterprise.
(U//FOUO) The objective of the RebA initiatives is to provide NSA Washington, and eventually all
SIGINT analysts, with a time-saving, automated, and fully integrated suite of capabilities which

 will enable you to more efficiently and effectively perform your duties and free you to engage in
more predictive and critical analysis.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 