DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) CIA - NSA Analysis Day -- Collaboration in Action
FROM: 
CRD Account Manager for CIA/DI (S112)
Run Date: 04/27/2005

(U//FOUO) With the theme of "Overcoming Intelligence Challenges through Analytic
Collaboration," Customer Gateway hosted CIA - NSA Analysis Day on March 16. This event was
the latest in a series of SID Customer Days, with partnership as a key element not only in the
focus and content but in the planning as well. Teams from CIA/Directorate of Intelligence (DI)
and NSA/SID (both Customer Relationships and Analysis and Production) worked together on
both sides of the beltway to develop the overall goals, agenda, and break-out sessions, as well
as plans for logistics.
From Humble Beginnings...(U)
(C) During the Customer Relationship Assessment conducted in August 2004, the NCR* for CIA
and CIA's ADDI determined the need to enhance analytic collaboration between CIA/DI and
SID/A&P. The NCR believed that a NSA-CIA day would be a positive step forward in the
relationship, so a joint team was tasked and planning began. Originally slated for November
2004, then moved to January 2005, the event was postponed due to the increased activities
that accompanied U.S. elections and inaugurations, not to mention no small amount of upheaval
caused by intelligence reform efforts and leadership changes at CIA. Despite the complications,
commitment remained strong and the planning team, which consisted of members from SID's
Customer Gateway and A&P Staff and from the Office of the DDI, found themselves moving
toward a March timeframe.
To Fruition...(U)
(TS//SI) On the day of the event, three commercial buses brought approximately 170 analysts
and leaders from the CIA to interact with about the same number of their NSA counterparts. The
Friedman auditorium was filled almost to capacity for an informative and insightful morning
session hosted by the Assistant Deputy Director for Customer Relationships. CIA Deputy
Director for Intelligence John Kringen provided a keynote address on "DI Intelligence Challenges
and Priorities," describing the current environment as the best of times (no one questions the
relevance of intelligence) and the worst of times (our tradecraft is under the microscope). SID
Assistant Deputy Director for Analysis and Production Cindy Farkus provided a second keynote
address on "Analysis and Production Information Sharing Strategy," describing initiatives being
taken within A&P to increase collaboration with customers and partners.
(TS//SI) Other plenary sessions included two examples of successful collaboration -- an
overview of the CounterProliferation SIGINT Cell and an interagency success story against
India's Nuclear Weapons C3 Network. The morning session wrapped up with a lively discussion
between audience members and leaders from both agencies. Particularly gratifying was the
range of experience brought by the participants, from a solid cadre of senior analysts to a large
number of recent hires. This mix addressed one of CIA's goals: to provide an introduction to
SIGINT for newer analysts.
(TS//SI) The afternoon featured 10 breakout sessions booked to capacity in the Ops2B
conference center and an additional 2 breakout sessions in the Friedman Auditorium. These
sessions, led by both CIA and NSA personnel and attended by approximately 340 people, offered
a wide range of topics aimed at:
providing insight into analytic processes and/or methods (e.g. DCI Red Cell, Presidential
Daily Briefings, Geospatial Exploitation, Development of SIGINT Accesses, Collection
Analysis, SIGINT Requirements),
highlighting successes and lessons learned (e.g. Russia DNR/DNI, Pakistan Nuclear

 Telemetry, Lessons Learned from Iraq WMD, Expectations of Policy-Makers), and
providing opportunities for discussion (e.g. Building Bridges with your Counterparts,
Analytic Challenges facing SIGINT).
Where to from Here?...(U)
(U//FOUO) CIA - NSA Analysis Day was originally envisioned as a beginning step in more regular
exchanges between DI and SID. There are many examples of good collaboration between our
organizations and there are many opportunities for improvement. By highlighting both strength
and growth areas, planners hoped to encourage more frequent and effective exchange.
Participants in this event were challenged to meet their counterparts and build networks. Followon engagements, in the form of analyst-to-analyst exchanges, training, briefings, and working
groups, must occur in order to continue the important work of enhancing collaboration and
improving intelligence for national security. The onus is on each and every one of us to continue
in this.
(U) As can be seen from the number of participants, number of sessions, and the wide variety of
topics addressed, much work went into the planning and execution for CIA - NSA Analysis Day.
This event could not have happened without the support and hard work of many people from
across CRD, A&P, and DI -- planners, speakers, volunteers, and the leadership and analysts who
gave of their time and energy to make this event a success. Thanks to all!
*(U) Note: NCR = NSA/CSS Representative

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 