DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(S//SI) With NSA Help, Iraqi SIGINTers Make Great Strides
FROM: Lt Col
 USAF
IAD/Network Infrastructure Products and Technology (I232)
Run Date: 11/17/2005

(S//SI) A report from the NSA team that is building up an indigenous Iraqi SIGINT
organization...
(S//SI) I recently returned from a second tour in Iraq as the FAD* Iraqi SIGINT Element (ISE)
Rebuild Task Force Chief, and the experience keeps getting better. During my initial tour last
year, the primary goal was to enhance relations with the ISE, an organization within the Iraqi
National Intelligence Service (INIS). To accomplish this goal, the FAD team procured COTS*
collection equipment, provided basic operator training, and established an information
dissemination process to provide ISE with vital intelligence information and to forward
Indications and Warnings information to the Multinational Forces in Iraq.
(S//SI) At the conclusion of my first tour, the ISE consisted of approximately 30 local nationals
operating in Baghdad from five fixed locations and one mobile unit with the ability to intercept
VHF and UHF signals using general frequency scanning technology. Despite using basic
equipment and having a limited number of personnel, the ISE averaged nearly 150 interceptions
per day.
(S//SI) My recent tour proved to be an equally exhilarating four months. Again, focusing on
foreign relations, the team had two key objectives: establish a formal training program and
extend the presence of SIGINT activities. Creating and implementing the training program was a
major step towards self-sustaining ISE operations. Using "train-the- trainer" methodology, the
FAD team was able to transfer responsibility for training incoming operators to a newly
appointed ISE Training Coordinator.
(S//SI) Near the end of my tour, the FAD team coordinated all logistics and travel arrangements
to deploy an ISE team to Camp Tiger, II Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF) camp near Al Qa'im
on the Syrian border. INIS relations with the Iraqi Army prevented ISE from using Iraqi Security
Forces as protection at field locations, but welcomed the opportunity to work under the safety of
II MEF. The ISE team, accompanied by several FAD team members, traveled to Camp Tiger and
became operational seven hours after boots hit the ground. The ISE team began intercepting
calls relating to battle damage assessment and activities targeting convoy movements. The II
MEF was astounded at the products and proceeded to request additional teams to
Hayditha and Hit, two other extremely active locations in the Al Anbar region.
(S//SI) Additionally, the team received a visit from General Casey, the Multi-National Force-Iraq
(MNF-I) Commander, who praised the efforts of the ISE team. Coordination activities have been
initiated for additional ISE teams outside of Baghdad in Mosul and Basrah, maintaining flexibility
to support other locations at the request of MNF-I command.
(S//SI) At the conclusion of my second tour, the ISE had approximately 100 employees
and were collecting over 5,000 calls per day. To date, NSA/CSS Georgia has produced over
280 Significant Activity (SIGACTS) reports based on ISE collect, with 7 SIGACT reports from the
team in Al Qa'im. The FAD team has already developed a strategic plan and system
requirements to expand operations and distribute intelligence information.

(S//SI) FAD Iraqi SIGINT Element Rebuild Task Force, May 2005
(S//SI) The groundwork is being laid to provide additional capabilities to the fledging ISE,
collection of Global System Mobile (GSM) phones and HF communications. In order to move

 forward with any of these initiatives, the INIS needs to establish a solid relationship with the
Iraqi Security Forces, as well as new members of the Ministry of Interior and Ministry of Defense
after elections in December. The initial ISE deployment depended upon US military for physical
security and logistical support of ISE personnel. As the US military draws down, the ISE will
need to depend on ISF for protection.
(S//SI) I was very fortunate to have two tours involving highly motivated and capable US, UK,
and Iraqi personnel, all of whom made tremendous contributions to this effort. It was an
amazing and unique experience that I would recommend to anyone seeking excitement and
challenges in support of US efforts abroad. I would emphatically do it all again without question
(pending approval from the wife and kids).
*(U) Notes: 
FAD = NSA's Foreign Affairs Directorate 
COTS = Commercial Off-the-Shelf
(U//FOUO) This article is reprinted from the Foreign Affairs Digest, October edition (titled "Iraqi
SIGINT Element (ISE) Tour.") See the previous article on FAD and the ISE .

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 