DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Speak Easy : Game Day (repost)
FROM:
Meadeators Club
Run Date: 09/26/2005

(U) Here's the finale of the "Speak Easy" public-speaking column. The entire text is unclassified.
Okay, so you've written your monologue and distilled it down. You've listed the salient points on
a single sheet and printed enough copies to give one to each expected attendee. You've worn
your best business attire. Now it's time to deliver.
Arrive at the location early - there will be things to do. You might have to get a key to open the
room. The room might have been double booked (yes, this does happen!) and if so, you might
have to post a note directing your customers to another room. You might realize that you forgot
something and have to go back to your office for it.
Make sure all needed equipment is there, and working. For example, if you're showing
PowerPoint slides, click through the entire sequence and check to see that they are readable on
the projector screen.
Place your notes in the most convenient place. If there is no lectern available, then a table will

large font (right?).

do. This is why you printed them in 

Wait for folks to arrive. Invariably a few will be late, so wait a few minutes after the scheduled
start time to begin speaking. This might be a good time to distribute the take-away
documentation in order to make sure people get it and to give them something to read while
they're waiting.
It has been said that public speaking is the thing Americans fear most. So it's likely that the
most difficult thing about giving your presentation will be nervousness. No advice will stop this.
You will become less jittery after you've done this several times, but that first talk (and probably
the next few) will make you wish the room had a beer fridge.
You could open with a joke in order to ease the tension. The problem is that not everyone has
the same sense of humor. You will know you're joking, but will everyone else? It might be
better to simply introduce yourself. The audience wants to know who you are and what your
function is. So tell them. This is the one part of your presentation that you definitely won't need
any notes for.
When you need your notes, just briefly glance at them; each bullet point should trigger your
memory so that you'll be able to look up and speak at least a sentence without having to refer
back to them.
Ask if there are any questions at the end. If it's a very large room or auditorium, repeat each
question so everyone can hear it before answering it.
When there are no more questions, be sure to thank everyone for listening, and remind them to
contact you if they have any more questions.
Congratulations! You're now a professional speaker!
(U) Editor's comment: Thanks to 

for contributing this series!

 "(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 