DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) New Org at Treasury: The Office of Terrorism and Financial
Intelligence
FROM: 
Chief, SID Customer Accounts Management (S112)
Run Date: 04/14/2005
(U//FOUO) Recently, I had the opportunity to accompany 
, Deputy Director for
Customer Relationships, and 
, Signals Intelligence Directorate (SID) Customer
Account Manager, to the Department of the Treasury as part of a regular schedule of visits with
customers.
(U//FOUO) Meeting with Janice Gardner, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Intelligence and
Analysis and 
, Director of the Intelligence Support Unit provided an opportunity to
gain insights into the intelligence restructuring that began at Treasury last year, to learn how
the Treasury interaction with the Intelligence Community is changing, and to hear what role SID
can play in supporting the mission and goals of Treasury's newest organization - The Office of
Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.
(U//FOUO) In April 2004, the Department of the Treasury established the Office of Terrorism
and Financial Intelligence (TFI), marshaling the Department's intelligence and enforcement
functions with the twin purposes of safeguarding the financial system against illicit use and
combating rogue nations, terrorist facilitators, money launderers, drug kingpins, and other
threats. Headed by the Treasury Under Secretary for Enforcement, TFI has two Assistant
Secretaries/Deputies who are responsible for Terrorist Financing/Financial Crime and Intelligence
and Analysis. The Financial Crimes Enforcement Center (FinCEN), which the SID supports as
well, reports directly to the Under Secretary for Enforcement under the reorganization.
(U//FOUO) The Office of Terrorist Financial and Financial Crime comprises the Office of Terrorist
Financing and Financial Crime (OTTFC), the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), and the
Executive Office of Asset Forfeiture (EOAF). The Office of Intelligence and Analysis (OIA) has the
all-source intelligence support function and maintains the 24/7 Watch Operations Center,
responsibilities previously provided by the Office of the Special Assistant to the Secretary
(National Security). This office also incorporates an analytic function and an information system
security program.
(U//FOUO) It is envisioned that by FY06 the OIA will be fully staffed with about 53 positions to
include representational personnel and analysts. The organization will work to:
Develop actionable intelligence to support the decision-makers in the Global War on
Terrorism
Enhance intelligence support on a broad range of political and economic issues
Improve the Treasury Department relations and standing within the Intelligence
Community
Coordinate intelligence activity throughout the Department
(U//FOUO) The OIA will produce analytic reporting for Treasury officials and the Intelligence
Community and other evidentiary files that will enable Treasury to exercise its various
authorities.
(U//FOUO) The SID relationship with the Department of the Treasury is one that has been
sustained over a number of years with the assignment of SID representatives--one serving main
Treasury officials and the other providing support to the Office of Foreign Assets Control. As the
organization evolves, OIA will continue to require SID representation as well as other SIGINT
services (i.e., reporting, Executive Support, tip-offs, and database access responding to
Treasury's Information Needs or Key Reads) and will need tools and technologies to facilitate
SIGINT information access and dissemination. The SIGINT Directorate has a major role to play in
ensuring that these requirements are met. Since the OIA will be more involved in analysis of

 information and data, I expect NSA/Treasury analytic exchanges will increase and more
collaborative efforts on specific targets will occur. I also see OIA as an opportunity for interns
who are interested in external assignments supporting the Global War on Terrorism.
(U//FOUO) Working with OIA, we want to ensure that our SIGINT support to the Department of
the Treasury remains at the highest level and that our resources are used in the best interests
and to the mutual benefit of both organizations. I am confident that we can achieve these goals
by developing a strong Customer Support Plan tailored to the needs of the Department of the
Treasury, by communicating frequently with our Treasury counterparts and by continuing
established analytic relationships within the Analysis and Production organizations.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 