DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Iraq -- Beyond the Headlines
FROM: Donna Rober
Technical Director, Office of International Crime & Narcotics (S2F)
Run Date: 08/23/2005

(U) What's the real situation in Iraq? And what can we do about it?
(U) Having been back from Iraq for a couple of months now, I can easily understand why people
were and are always asking me how it was "over there," was I scared, why are we staying there,
is it really getting better, and would you go back. I watch the news like everyone else, but I
know that there is so much more going on that just doesn't make the cut. I consider myself
lucky to have been there, to have seen things firsthand, to have gained a better understanding
of what our government is doing over there, and most importantly to see the impact of SIGINT
on operations.
(U) When I am asked how it was or if I was scared I often have to stop and think about it.
Indeed there were some scary moments - it is a war zone after all - but I honestly wasn't living
in fear. It is amazing how quickly you adapt to your environment and indeed most of the time
the ongoing actions were more of an annoyance, primarily because our workday or sleep were
interrupted! Unfortunately the news is filled with the latest ugliness and there is very little else
covered, so it seems like the threat is even worse than it really is. While the death and
destruction are indeed horrendous, there is a lot of life and living going on despite it all. It is
amazing to drive through the streets and view normal everyday bustle, just like in any other
major city.
(S) In response to the questions about staying the course and improving/degrading conditions, I
find that easy to answer. I had the opportunity to work closely with several Iraqis, was included
in briefings on the US and Multinational Forces-Iraq training and rebuilding plans, and I was
there during that very historic January election. What an amazing place and people.
Unfortunately they have neither the background nor the tools to go it alone as they try to create
their own sovereign nation. It no longer matters whether we were right or wrong to go into the
country, we are there and they need and, more importantly, want our help. It is going to take
time and patience, but they want us beside them as they build their future.
(U) The changes I saw following Election Day were amazing. The resolve of the people shone
through and they have repeatedly demonstrated their determination to participate in the
creation of their own nation. Many risk their lives everyday as they go to work, particularly if
they are working for their government or for our forces. If you pay attention to the stories below
the headlines you will see that so many of the targets are police or people who are working
towards a constitutional government. Despite it all, they stay the course and the lines of
volunteers for police and military duty grow longer, not shorter.
(U) There are also positive signs of improvement if you pay attention to who is carrying out
security actions and activities. More and more checkpoints are Iraqi manned, more and more
cordons and raids are being conducted by Iraqi units. The news makes it sound like the fighting
between religious sects is something that can't be overcome. While it is not going to go away, it
is important to know that throughout the government - military, police, policy makers,
ministries etc. - folks from all sects are working together towards what they view as a common
goal, a free and safe Iraq. There is no division between Shia, Sunni, Kurd, Christian, etc. when it
comes to these efforts and yet you seldom see anything in the news that points to how well they
are working together. There will always be those who are unhappy and will use whatever angle
to make their point, but as was pointed out to me by an Iraqi - multi-cultures/religions live
together peacefully around the world and they have done the same in Iraq and will continue to
do so.

 (S//SI) When asked if I would go back the answer is always yes. This was the best professional
experience I have ever had. Seeing firsthand the implementation of many different SIGINT
capabilities, helping to facilitate those, identifying new opportunities, and watching actions move
forward with minimal delay were all exhilarating. Most rewarding though were the opportunities
to work closely with a huge group of professionals back at headquarters who provided me with
incredible technical and emotional support, and to work directly with an extremely dedicated
group of professionals, US and Iraqi, on the ground in Iraq.
(S//SI) Most of us know that SIGINT makes a difference at some level. It all came together for
me when a senior officer with the task force responsible for acting on the intelligence stated
"When I have SIGINT I have a 90% plus success rate of rolling up legitimate targets, without it I
am right maybe 40% of the time. I can't afford to risk our soldiers lives for a 'catch and release'
program - I need SIGINT." I've never heard a better-defined impact statement and every
SIGINTer should be very proud of that accomplishment because it is the result of EVERYONE's
hard work.
(S//SI) It takes all of us, regardless of skill community, to make SIGINT the best it can be. Iraq
is an excellent example of where it all comes together. The headlines show us all of the bad that
continues there, but indeed things are getting better and SIGINT plays a key role in both
securing the country so that the Iraqi people can regain control, and in providing information on
how well they are doing. Not every one of us can or will go to Iraq but being on the front end, in
any of the myriad positions, gives you an even greater sense of what is going on, beyond the
headlines.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 