DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(S) The Saudi Assassination Plot -- How It Was Thwarted
FROM:
Deputy Chief, Customer Account Management (S112) (previously assigned as
SIGINT Rep to the FBI WFO)
Run Date: 08/09/2005

 had received an award for helping
(S) On Friday (see article ) we announced that
extinguish an assassination plot against the Saudi Crown Prince. Today,
tells how it played
out...
(S) It began innocently enough. The simple investigation of an American traveling overseas
carrying a large amount of U.S. currency secreted in his luggage. It blossomed into a case with
international diplomatic implications involving a plot to assassinate the Saudi Crown Prince.
Ultimately the assassination plot was thwarted, an international incident was averted and many
of the leads derived from the investigation led to opening several other counterterrorism
investigations. The success was accomplished by a truly multi-agency, multi-national
collaborative operation. Information sharing at unprecedented levels turned a run-of-the-mill
criminal investigation into an award winning counterterrorism investigation.
The Plot Unravels (U)
(S) In 2003, Abdurahman Alamoudi arrived at London's Heathrow Airport with almost $325,000
hidden in his luggage. An alert airport security agent found the money. The British confiscated
the money and allowed Alamoudi to continue his travel. FBI Special Agents arrested Alamoudi
upon his return to the U.S. and began a joint investigation with Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE). Alamoudi is President of the American Muslim Foundation and a suspected
supporter of terrorism.
(S) Also in late 2003, 
 was arrested in Cairo, Egypt and sent to
Saudi Arabia because of his suspected involvement in facilitating terrorist activities in that
country. During the course of Saudi Mabahith (Internal Security Service) interviews with
,
they discovered an elaborate international plot to foment unrest in Saudi Arabia.
was an
agent of Libya's External Security Organization (ESO) and a close associate of Saif Al-Islam
Qhadafi, Mu'ammar Qhadafi's son.
The Genesis of the Plot (U)
(S) As a result of a perceived insult and threat by the Saudi Crown Prince directed at Mu'ammar
Qhadafi at the Arab League Summit in Sharm el-Sheikh, Qhadafi uses his ESO and Saudi
dissidents living in London, England to plan the assassination of the Saudi Crown Prince with the
ultimate goal of bringing down the House of Saud Royal Family in Saudi Arabia.
The Plot Foiled (U)
(S) The plot unraveled because of a thorough, old-fashioned investigation strengthened by using
many new intelligence techniques perfected after 9/11/01 with the help of the Patriot Act.
provided a wealth of information, but because of his detention in Egypt and
Saudi Arabia, he would not be a viable witness in U.S. courts. With analytic assistance from NSA,
metadata analysis, digital network intelligence information, travel tracking and collateral
reporting were all used to corroborate much of what
 alleged.
(S) At the same time, this wealth of intelligence tied the plot directly to Libyan leader Mu'ammar
Qhadafi, while also leading to the conviction of Alamoudi, disrupting the plot to assassinate the
Saudi Crown Prince, and allowing the UK insight into Saudi dissident activities in England.
Intelligence derived and shared with the Saudi Mabahith also led to the discovery of a large,
probably Al-Qaida-influenced network within Saudi Arabia.

 (S) This investigation was a truly joint effort. FBI Washington Field Office (WFO), FBI HQs, BICE,
Eastern District of Virginia (EDVA) attorneys, New Scotland Yard (Financial Intelligence Unit),
Saudi Mabahith, CIA, and NSA were key players. NSA's contributions were significant. The North
African Relations Branch's (S2E32) language analysts and reporters produced many products
showing Libya's interest in the Saudi Royal family and confirmed the transfer of money in
diplomatic pouches to the UK. In addition, several S2E32 Libya experts visited FBI WFO to brief
agents, analysts and attorneys on key Qhadafi/ESO relationships in Libya. The Follow-the-People
Branch (S2D32) was able to confirm many of the travel details of key players in this plot. And
finally, the Counterterrorism Product Line (S2I) was able to provide significant metadata links to
many (if not all) of the individuals implicated in the case.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 