DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(S) Counterterrorism Product Line Realigns
FROM: Lee Ann Graul
Counterterrorism Product Line - Management Services (S2I02)
Run Date: 04/18/2005

(S) The Counterterrorism Product Line (CT PL - S2I) etched another marker in its history -effective 27 March 2005, S2I stood up a new organizational structure, intended to reflect and
underscore a strategic shift in focus. This is the most significant change to the CT mission since
the surge immediately following the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001.
(S) It builds upon the effort, the vision and the legacy of the individuals who have served this
mission in the past and incorporates the insight of those looking to the future. This
organizational change -- featuring a team-based concept linking SIGINT Development,
Intelligence Analysis and Language Analysis focused on regional areas, plus the addition of
division-level strategy leads, operations coordinators and subject-matter experts -- will
strengthen our ability to sustain the CT mission for an extended fight and is consistent with
Agency, SID and A&P goals for optimizing the NSA/CSS posture in the Global War on Terror.
Further, we believe this organizational realignment, together with specific goals and objectives,
will enable the CT PL to achieve three key imperatives:
increased collaboration,
improved mission management, and
for our supremely dedicated workforce, a more balanced workload.
(S) This action will enhance the execution of the production mission against CT targets in a
networked federation with our global SIGINT production partners by creating a structure that
aligns better with the intelligence and operational partnerships which have emerged 2.5 years
into this war. The emphasis on partners will include: the Regional Security Operations Centers;
enhanced partnership with tactical military cryptologists; uniquely commissioned SIGINT
missions at NCRs, Joint Analysis Centers; NSA/CSS partner organizations; and an enduring
engagement with foreign partners (Second and Third Party).
(S) Our new construct has the support of and aligns with the direction of the Associate Deputy
Director for Counterterrorism in SID, Lonny Anderson, and will have linkage into the CT Mission
Management Center. (See related article .)
(S) These and many related actions are not without risk, and we anticipate some challenges in
the transition. Our goal has been to design an approach that could be executed without a break
in optempo. We have invested nearly a year in planning these steps and we have had the benefit
of insight and experience from many who have served this mission in a variety of capacities.
(U//FOUO) Detailed charts and narrative descriptions of the organization and functions
associated with elements in this new structure can be found at the CT PL home page
(http://ctprod.do.nsa). We welcome your thoughts and observations as we begin the next leg in
the journey of strengthening and sustaining the CT mission! Welcome to the new CT!

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 