DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) Planning the Future of the Collection Skill Community
FROM: Charles H. Berlin III
Advocate of the Collection Skill Field and Deputy Director for Customer
Relationships (S1)
Run Date: 08/22/2005

(U//FOUO) The Collection Resource Capability Initiative... unmasked
(C//SI) A Link Access (S33) study, conducted in 2004, identified the declining health of the
Collection Skill Community. It highlighted that human capital is being lost, new hires coming
into the field do not cover attrition levels, the collection community is overly senior in grade, and
the Collection Management training material is obsolete. The study noted that all levels of the
Community are at risk and identified strategic options.
(C//SI) To turn this study into action, Link Access, in partnership with ADET , HR , A&P , and
other Data Acquisition offices, has formed the Collection Resource Capability Initiative (CRCI).
The objective of the CRCI is to define roles, responsibilities, knowledge and skills for the
collection capability. The team also is developing strategies for staffing the positions identified,
and providing a career model based on continued individual development. Based on these
objectives, resource investment recommendations will be made based on mission, technical
soundness, fiscal responsibility and personnel.
(C//SI) The team's focus is to project how the NSA enterprise will access SIGINT
signals 10 years from now and beyond, from the human resources perspective. In order
to make informed decisions, the CRCI requires input from various sources throughout the
enterprise. As the team reviews options, other communities will be engaged for their expertise
and opinions. The team expects to complete its work and present recommendations to agency
seniors before the end of this calendar year.
(U//FOUO) The CRCI team recently concluded their first phase of the initiative, which provided a
framework for option 1 - revitalizing the Collection Skill Field. They now turn their attention to
option 2 - that of blending the Collection capability into other skill communities. There was a
third option identified - contracting collection and collection management out to industry. That
option is being investigated through corporate council, and is not likely to be a viable solution.
(U//FOUO) Included in this initiative is providing a channel to capture specific information that
will assist in developing the final recommendation. The team will be conducting a survey of the
Collection Skill Field community in the next several weeks. If you receive a survey request
from the CRCI, please take the time to complete it accurately. While you may not be able
to participate in the day-to-day involvement with the CRCI, the survey is your chance to
provide your input to help change the future direction of this important function of the agency:
collection.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 