DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) One More Year: Staying On and Moving Forward
FROM: MG Richard Quirk, USA
SIGINT Director
Run Date: 06/21/2005

(U) The Army has asked me to stay on active duty for one more year, until July '06, and I have
agreed. I am assuming that year will be spent here at NSA as the SIGINT Director. I am really
happy at this prospect. I have greatly enjoyed working with all of you and I look forward to a
wonderful year ahead. This turn of events gives me the chance to further a few personal goals I
have set for the United States SIGINT System.
(U) A primary responsibility of the SID Leadership Team is to manage missions and resources so
that you can do your job. Of course, we have a long list of goals published in our strategic plan,
and they remain valid. However, there are a few improvements I think we can contribute to
make our cryptologic system better. To that end, here are some of the things the SIGINT
leadership team and I are working on:
(U) Formalizing a mechanism for SIGINT governance. We have developed a very good
construct for strategic steerage of the US SIGINT System through our USSS mission list.
We have the strategic steering wheel, but now we must create linkages between that
steering wheel and the tires on the road, by developing operational and tactical
governance mechanisms (meetings, processes, decision-making bodies, etc).
(U) Finding a way to bring more unity and cohesiveness to the Global SIGINT System.
We have a history of fragmented responses to the missions across NSA and the Services.
We need to find a way to help our system grow together, to have the Services and NSA
design in partnership every aspect of the system: architecture, concepts, doctrine,
training, and organizing, equipping, and manning. At this time, we have a historic
opportunity to build an integration center, and an unprecedented need to do so.
(U) Measure the SIGINT effort. We need the right metrics so we can apportion resources
to missions, assess the results, and reapportion accordingly.
(U) No one needs to tell you that we have been transforming at breakneck speed and the next
year will be no different. Change has become our tradition! Even at times like this, when most of
our customers are extremely satisfied with our products and services, we must push ourselves
to change, because we know we can and will do better. It is only our insight, initiative, and
energy that keep us ahead of our adversaries.
(U) I am truly honored with the prospect of staying another year (it will be my fifth, longer than
I have been at any other assignment). I look forward to working with all of you. Together we will
continue to transform the USSS, and to support our nation by executing our critical mission.
Thank you for all you do every day. You make my job a pleasure.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 