DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) In the National Interest: Supporting the 'Non-Title 50'
Organizations
FROM:
Customer Account Manager (S112)
Run Date: 03/16/2005

Providing SIGINT to departments and agencies that are outside the Intelligence Community
(U//FOUO)
(U//FOUO) The primary and traditional clients for SIGINT information are the organizations that
make up the Intelligence Community (IC), especially the military components of the Defense
Department. However, there are other Executive Branch organizations outside the IC -- called
"non-Title 50 Agencies"** -- that also receive SIGINT products and services. These are nontraditional clients in the sense that their intelligence needs are driven by national policy issues
and are usually more strategic than combat-support focused. However they can sometimes be
tactical as well, as in the economic (trade) sense.
(U//FOUO) What does the non-Title 50 organization/customer look like?
(U//FOUO) Organizations identified as key non-Title 50 Agencies include Departmental entities
such as the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and Interior and Independent Agencies such
as the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Communications
Commission and the Joint Terrorist Tracking Task Forces. By their differing missions, they
represent a very diverse client set for SIGINT support.
(U//FOUO) How does NSA support non-Title 50 Agencies?
(TS//SI) Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, these non-Title 50 Agencies have
gained added responsibilities to protect national interests and critical infrastructures as part of
the Homeland Security effort -- and our intelligence support has increased accordingly. Some
non-Title 50 organizations/customers have a history of using intelligence information, and
interact with the IC routinely; others have very limited IC experience and must rely upon the
external NSA Representative(s) or the Liaison Officer for SIGINT support.
(TS//SI) What make these customers interesting are their diverse intelligence interests.
Terrorist-related activity, protection of critical infrastructures, bioterrorism, trade negotiations
and economic issues, political leadership, energy, nuclear proliferation, bovine spongiform
encephalopathy (BSE) or "Mad Cow Disease", Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS),
banking and financial institutions, alien smuggling, protecting U.S. monuments and landmarks
are all topics that now fall within our national security interests.
(U//FOUO) The electronic delivery system in the client's workspace is INTELINK, where the
customer can readily retrieve SIGINT product through the CT-Link or through dial-up to the
ANCHORY database. SIGINT-On-Demand (SOD) is available through these systems. Our SID
Representatives represent the other means of product delivery, providing the sensitive series or
other compartmented information reports that are not available on INTELINK.
(U//FOUO) The number of clients reviewing SIGINT product differs with each organization and
can vary from one, two, or three senior executive officials to about 40 individuals. Depending on
the schedules of the clients, the SID Representatives meet with them daily, weekly or bi-weekly,
or when situations requiring the customer's immediate attention arise. Non-Title 50 Agencies
also receive an all-source Senior Executive Intelligence Brief (SEIB) Daily or the National
Intelligence Daily in which SIGINT information is incorporated.
(U//FOUO) What has been the impact of SIGINT support to Non-Title 50
organizations?

 (U//FOUO) From the customers' perspective, SIGINT "provides unique insight," "is very valuable
reporting" and "is very helpful, making it easier for officials to accomplish their jobs." Customer
success stories indicate that SIGINT has provided that needed foreign perspective, has assisted
in countering positions opposing U.S. policy and helped to achieve successful outcomes in
delicate negotiations with international counterparts.
(U//FOUO) As the use and reliance on SIGINT information increases, more requests are coming
from these Agencies for SIGINT training, meetings with NSA analysts, and visits to NSA for
Directorate level briefings and technical demonstrations. The customers are very open to
information-sharing and are offering to work with NSA analysts collaboratively.
(U//FOUO) From the NSA perspective, support to these organizations is achieving the teaming,
customer outreach, and information sharing goals as outlined in the NSA Strategic Plan and NSA
Transformation 2.0 and the SID Customer Support Plan (CSP). The CSP has been a very useful
tool to document the customer's strategic goals, the SIGINT intelligence information required to
meet these goals, and actions that best satisfy these goals. The feedback coming from
customers has been useful in determining what our SIGINT mission priorities should be and in
steering analysis and production and realigning resources. Customer tip-off information has
assisted in the analysis of collected information and has resulted in more responsive and timely
reporting.
(U//FOUO) In supporting the non-Title 50 organizations, we expect that the client base will grow
and that the demand for SIGINT products, services, and technologies will increase. As we forge
new customer relationships and work together, we do so in the national interest.
**(U) Note: 
(U//FOUO) So-called because the IC organizations operate in accordance with Title 50 US Code
413.
(U//FOUO) Representatives:
SEAM = Senior Executive Account Manager 
AM = Account Manager
SEAM Agriculture

William Squicciarini

AM Agriculture
SID Rep Agriculture

*

SEAM Commerce
AM Commerce
SID Rep Commerce
SEAM Federal Communications Commission
AM Federal Communications Commission
SID Rep Federal Communications Commission
SEAM Federal Reserve System

*
David Sherman

AM Federal Reserve System
SID Rep Federal Reserve System
SEAM Interior

William Squicciarini

AM Interior
SID Rep Interior

*

 SEAM National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Larry LaPointe

AM National Aeronautics and Space Administration
SID Rep National Aeronautics and Space Administration
SEAM Transportation

Francis Landolf

AM Transportation
SID Rep Transportation
*Support from Washington Liaision Office (WLO)

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 