DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) Coming Soon to GCHQ Reports: Source Descriptors
FROM:
Reporting Policy and Guidance (S12P1)
Run Date: 06/01/2005

"Intelligence Source Descriptors" to appear on GCHQ reports, starting soon (C)
(C) As a result of the British Government's inquiry on weapons of mass destruction, also known
as the Butler Commission Report, the British Government has mandated the use of "Intelligence
Source Descriptors" on all intelligence reports. Consequently, GCHQ will soon begin using these
descriptors on all their SIGINT reports. Because these reports will be forwarded to our U.S.
customers with the descriptors, we wanted you to have as much background as possible to
prepare for any questions you might get.
(U) The descriptors include three categories -- access, identity, and reliability -- and will be used
by customers to gauge the accuracy and usefulness of the information. Reports will also include
a lexicon to help the reader understand the components of the descriptors. An example and a
draft lexicon appear below.
(S) At this time, GCHQ is the only SIGINT producer to add this feature to its reporting. This
practice will be incorporated slowly into all the reporting lines at GCHQ. For the time being, only
the Iran target area will be involved. NSA and the other SIGINT partners are reviewing GCHQ's
initiative to determine if this approach would be adaptable to our respective reporting. We will
keep you informed of any updates to this initiative.
Descriptor Format:
The indicator will be placed below the key points section of the report and will take the following
form:

(example)

Source:

Access

Identity

Reliability

Source:

Direct

Admiral A to Captain B

Uncertain

Draft Lexicon:
A SIGINT source description comprises three elements:
1.  Access - GCHQ's judgement on the nature of the source's access to the intelligence
contained in the report. A choice of two phrases:
Indirect: the SIGINT source is reporting information obtained from another
source who has access to those with direct knowledge.
Direct: the SIGINT source has direct knowledge of the intelligence fact reported
or appears to be in direct contact with those personally involved or
knowledgeable.
2.  Identity - Identification of the SIGINT source by name or role (where known).
3.  Reliability - GCHQ's comment on the SIGINT source's previous reporting record. A
choice of three phrases:
Unknown: previously unreported source, no reason to question accuracy
Reliable: established reporting record judged to be accurate

 Uncertain: limited reporting record and/or some uncertainty as to the reliability
of the source or sources
(C) There are no plans at present to use a like program on NSA reports; however, when
readdressing GCHQ reports, analysts are not to remove or alter the source descriptor in any
way.
(U) Please send any comments/feedback on this initiative to DL RPG.

(U) Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ)

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 