DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Remember the Alamo!
FROM: 
Chief, Communications and Support Services, NSA/CSS Texas (MRSOC)
Run Date: 02/25/2005

...and don't forget the sunglasses -- Life in the San Antonio area,
home to the Medina Regional Security Operations Center (MRSOC)
(U)

 SERIES: 
(U) SID Around the
World '05

(U) Today is Valentine's Day! The sun is shining, it is 78 degrees
here in San Antonio, the trees are budding and the birds are
beginning to sing. Spring planting season will begin soon. My
garden is calling to me! Winter is over. Yes, winter is short here in
South Texas. It makes me smile to remember all the seemingly
endless, icy, snowy days I have spent elsewhere in other
Februarys, and I wonder what I did to deserve such beautiful
weather in such a gorgeous location!

1.  Paradise Found
2.  A Very Southern City
3.  Stress Doesn't Live
Here
4.  Remember the
Alamo!
5.  The 'Other' End-toEnd SIGINT Site in
the UK
6.  Letter from Oz

(U) Weather is not the only thing that is beautiful here in San
Antonio! The close proximity of the Riverwalk and all of the
wonderful restaurants make it difficult to know how to spend a
pleasant evening. Weekends, evenings and days off are filled with
entertainment options! There are lots of local fairs, San Antonio
Spurs basketball games, picnics in parks at nearby lakes, and all of
the activities associated with a large city.

(U) Riverwalk
(U) San Antonio competes with Dallas to be recognized as the 8th
largest city in the U.S. Last year Dallas won as the 8th largest with
San Antonio coming in 9th; perhaps this year San Antonio will
again rank 8th. It is a big city, but feels like a small town. San
Antonio stands out as the prime vacation spot in Texas. The main
attractions, in addition to the famous Riverwalk, include Sea World,
Fiesta Texas, a large zoo, water parks with long seasons, the
Alamo, and the rodeo with its kick-off Cowboy Breakfast which
made the Guiness Book of World Records -- all within a short
radius of the city limits.
(U) My family had to be convinced that they were not giving up the
fun we had at the ocean by moving to San Antonio. It only took
one trip to beautiful South Padre Island on the Gulf of Mexico to
win them over. We watched the shrimp boats, enjoyed the sun and
the surf on the beaches of the Gulf of Mexico, and sampled the
fresh seafood at one of the local restaurants before journeying
back home.
(U) Are there negatives to living in Texas? Well...yes. There are
some extra hot days in the middle of the summer. You can spend
an entire day driving without ever leaving the state or reaching the
border. The driving patterns on the roadways are different and
require some adjustment before being able to confidently navigate
them. Perhaps the biggest change I noticed was the cost of car

 insurance for my teenage son, with a perfect driving record, no
tickets, no accidents, and a consistent good student discount! My
first car insurance payment almost sent me into sticker shock!
(U) Nevertheless, the positives outweigh the negatives. Housing is
extremely economical and very affordable! Large sprawling
ranchers, gorgeous two-story homes, or a little house on the
prairie on several acres can be purchased for a fraction of the cost
of East or West Coast housing. In addition, several accredited
universities are located within the local area; local public and
private school systems are extremely good, offering many
opportunities for their students. Medical facilities are top quality,
and there is less traffic congestion.
(U) Did I mention Texas-friendly, and no state income tax? Yes,
Texas is still the friendly place that has always been one of its most
notable trademarks. If you are looking for a change of pace in a
warm, friendly environment we hope that y'all will come down and
join us. San Antonio is waiting for you!

(U) The Alamo

(U//FOUO) Aerial view of MRSOC

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 