DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Speak Easy : Creating Notes
FROM: 
Meadeators Club
Run Date: 06/07/2005

For most people, public speaking is a learned skill. Today we
present the first in a new monthly column with tips on how to give
better speeches. The author is 
 an officer of the
Meadeators Club . 
 holds the rank of Advanced Toastmaster,
Bronze. (U//FOUO)
(U) A good presentation doesn't just happen -- it is a culmination
of preparation that takes about ten times as long as the speech
itself. You need to gather data, organize it, write it down, prepare
materials, and rehearse.
(U) In order to develop your monologue, it will help to write down
everything that might be pertinent; you can always remove what
you don't need later. Write it exactly as you would like to say it.
Make sure your speech has a definite introduction, body, and
conclusion. For example, your opening paragraph might be
something like:
Hello. My name is 
 I am Chief of the
Transylvanian Traffic Office. Welcome to the weekly
Transylvanian intelligence briefing. Today I will address
three urgent issues: spiders on the Web, bats in our belfry,
and network attacks by vampires.
(U) Once you've written your entire speech, print it out. Read it
aloud, making additions/deletions as you see fit. Do this until
you're comfortable with your material and you have it mostly
memorized.
(U) The next step is to create "bulletized" notes to be used during
your presentation. Remember, when you give your speech, you
should look at the audience and/or presentation materials (charts,
maps, graphs). You'll want to minimize your use of notes, and you
must find the information you're looking for as quickly as possible,
so you will not want to have verbatim notes in front of you. For
example, your opening paragraph can be bulletized as follows.
intro
spiders on Web
bats in belfry
network attacks by vampires
(U) This way, if you forget the items in your list, you won't have to
sort through a bunch of verbs and prepositions; they'll be neatly
located on the left side of the paper.
(U) Print the bulletized notes in a large font. I use

Verdana 18 . Audiences become distracted when the
speaker has to lean down in order to read something from the

 SERIES: 
(U) Speak Easy
1.  Speak Easy :
Creating Notes
2.  Speak Easy : Dress
Rehearsal
3.  Speak Easy : TakeAway Documentation
4.  Speak Easy : Game
Day

 lectern. You should be able to read your notes while standing up
straight.
(U) Now practice your speech using the notes. Make sure you can
recite it in its entirety; if you can't, then your notes might need to
be beefed up.
(U) Next month: Dress Rehearsal

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 