DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Introducing Semi-Annual Calls for Academic and Career
Development Programs
FROM: 
SID Mission Interface for Education & Training Issues (S01)
Run Date: 08/29/2005
(U) Within the next few weeks a SID announcement will be released to the workforce soliciting
nominations for various long-term career developmental opportunities. A listing of those
programs is provided at the end of this article. SID senior management has made the decision
to perform two calls per year for these academic developmental opportunities -- a fall
call and a winter call -- instead of soliciting these various programs on an ad-hoc basis
throughout the year.
(U) The benefits of implementing this semi-annual call for these programs results in a more
streamlined and efficient process, reduces the volume of man-hours spent on the review and
administrative process for these programs; and allows for a more pro-active involvement of SID
managers in addressing career development with their subordinates while linking these
developmental activities to their Individual Development Plans (IDPs).
(U) The SID announcement will provide eligibility criteria for the various programs, instructions
on how to apply, and guidance on the application submission process. The SID senior
management team will review nominations for these developmental programs collectively to
facilitate selection of the best candidates for the most appropriate opportunity. SID personnel
must ensure that their nominations are submitted in accordance with the SID internal deadline
rather than Agency announced program deadlines.
(U) If you meet the eligibility criteria and have your management's support, you are highly
encouraged to apply for one or more of these career developmental opportunities. Questions
regarding this semi-annual process for these various training opportunities can be addressed to
the Ft. Meade, ADET/Customer Service Center (POC: 
, sid: 
Academic/Career Developmental Opportunities

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 