DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Expressing Thanks on Veterans Day
FROM: MG Richard Quirk, USA
SIGINT Director
Run Date: 11/10/2005

Although our nation "pauses" several times a year to honor the women and men who serve or
have served in the Armed Forces, Veterans Day is among the most meaningful.
If you've ever seen the Civil War documentary produced by Ken Burns you may have been
moved by the poignant footage at the end which shows veterans of that terrible war, in the
twilight of their lives, reaching across a stone wall to shake hands--Union to Confederate.
Despite finding one another on opposite sides of that conflict, you can see in their eyes how they
understood that only those who had been there can truly appreciate the sacrifice of service in
combat.
Much attention has been paid in the last decade to "the greatest generation," women and men
who in the 1940's sacrificed their youth and some cases their lives to preserve the values for
which this nation stands. As their numbers fade, their experience echoes through those who
walk behind them in any parade -- veterans of Korea, Vietnam, the Persian Gulf, Afghanistan
and Iraq.
In 2004 the Veterans Administration estimated that there were approximately 25 million
veterans in civilian life, of whom 18.5 million are wartime veterans. We owe an extraordinary
debt to these individuals, many of whom have lifelong needs resulting from their service.
Through the Combined Federal Campaign you have an opportunity to support programs that
directly and indirectly benefit these special Americans.
A keyword search on "veteran" in the CFC online donation site yielded 27 organizations that
extend services to veterans. But there are a great many more opportunities to give to medical,
social, recreational and financial organizations that our veterans depend upon. If you've been
waiting for the inspiration to make your contribution this year, take time this Veterans Day to
consider saying thanks to those who have accepted the call to service.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 