DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) A Commander's Legacy
FROM:
Chief, Communications /Public Affairs/ Policy, NSA/CSS Texas (F73)
Run Date: 07/28/2005

(U) An interview with the departing Medina Commander...
(U) Colonel Robert J. Butler's departure as Commander, NSA/CSS Texas and his retirement
presented the unique opportunity to capture his perspectives and insight regarding the mission
and the site overall. Respectfully known as "the SIGINT Cowboy," he balanced a love of the
military, dedication to the mission, and strong family values throughout his outstanding military
career.
(U) Pictured below in this article are Col. and
 Below are the interview questions he was asked, and his answers.
NSA/CSS Texas appreciates his thoughtful responses which are now the first chapter in our
corporate NSA/CSS Texas history.

(U) 
(U) Q: When did you take command of this site?
(U) A: June 2003. I was not initially aware that the position was dual-hatted. I thought
there would be two Colonels on site, one for the 543d and one for MRSOC.
(U) Q: What did you consider the greatest challenge facing this site when you first arrived?
(U) A: Antiquated physical and IT infrastructure. I had been here in 1996 and noticed no
change or infrastructure upgrade from what I had seen then.
(U) Q: What are our challenges now and what direction would you provide in helping us deal
with them?
(U) A: Dealing with change... Building out is an exciting opportunity, but requires us to
really "live and grow" in two worlds at once. We all need to be pulling in the same
direction. Continuous communication is the key.
(U) Q: What do you consider the greatest achievements of this site during your tenure as
Commander?
(U) A: The transition from a field station to a national cryptologic center.
(U) Q: What things do you think we could have done better or still need to work on to continue
to improve in the future?
(U) A: Communicate, communicate, communicate,
(U) Q: You have communicated your "L-I-F-E" philosophy...Can you expand that?
(U) A: L-I-F-E stands for Loyalty-Integrity-Fitness-Enthusiasm. The overall
philosophy is about building relationships; building a two-way street. Loyalty includes
feeling connected. Integrity is more than honesty; it speaks to doing the right thing,
demonstrating high values. Fitness has multiple dimensions and is more than staying
physically fit; it includes spiral learning and spiritual fitness. Enthusiasm refers to seeing
opportunities for improving and taking advantage of those opportunities. This philosophy

 is all about building a strong team; developing a strong capability over time; and, seeing
yourself as an integral part of that strong team.
(U) Q: With the transformation, how do you see "cultural change" coming about here?
(U) A: Cultural change takes time. I often use the analogies of turning an aircraft carrier
in the middle of the ocean, or turning a AA baseball team like the San Antonio Missions
into a major league team like the Seattle Mariners. We need to continue to get the right
people in the right seats and then continue building small, diverse teams working within
larger teams. We need to set these teams up for success with the right tools and
resources and celebrate their successes often.
(U) Q: What message would you like to send to your workforce as we move forward?
(U) A: You are all patriots and silent warriors... Continue building relationships, seeking
first to understand. Be open to new ideas, communicate and act boldly, with
transparency.
(U) Q: What guidance would you provide to your senior staff and managers?
(U) A: Get out from behind your desks. Think collective purpose -- there can only be one
agenda in an organization and that is the boss's agenda. See your boss's perspectives
and help him/her succeed. Be enthusiastic -- that kind of attitude is contagious. Make the
hard calls before your boss needs to make them for you.
(U) Q: Outstanding leaders are often asked what they consider their greatest accomplishment.
What accomplishment would you most like to be remembered for?
(U) A: I would like to think that I made some kind of a positive difference in the lives of
many here on this site and bettered Medina's support to national security. I tried to
implement a vision through planning, relationship building, and "staying the course."
(U) Q: Is there a parting message you would like to leave us with?
(U) A: Remember, live "L-I-F-E."

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 