DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Is NSA Correctly Postured Against the Most Critical Missions?
FROM: MG Richard Quirk, USA
Signals Intelligence Director
Run Date: 06/09/2005

(S//SI) One of the main duties of SID leadership is to decide how best to allocate our finite
resources to maximum effect. Since our resources are limited, it often amounts to a "zero-sum"
situation, where giving resources to one mission means taking resources from another. So how
do we allocate our internal resources so that we focus on the highest priority areas, while
acknowledging that we are not able to cover other areas to the same level? -- By basing these
decisions on a prioritized SIGINT Mission List , which identifies the "must do" targets within
each mission. This list is reviewed monthly by the SID Leadership Team and can be adjusted as
our national priorities change, thus implementing the corporate strategic goal of making the
USSS more agile.
(S) In reviewing the list, SID leadership gathers input on community requirements from the
SIGINT National Intelligence Officers (SINIOs); the Issue Management Teams (IMTs) provide
input on our SIGINT capabilities. After the Mission List is discussed, reviewed and approved by
the SID Leadership Team, it is provided to DIRNSA for his review and signature, producing a
final version of the list. This forms a key element of SID's Governance Responsibility #1 "Discern
the SIGINT Missions."
(S) The Mission List represents NSA's contract with our customers for delivering SIGINT efforts
against our most critical targets. While the SIGINT Mission List is still a "work in progress" we
believe it is now ready to roll out to the NSA workforce, SIGINT partners and customers.
What is the primary function of the SIGINT Strategic Mission List and how does this
list fit into national and SIGINT requirement processes?
(S//SI) The SIGINT Strategic Mission List represents the intent of the NSA Director in regard to
mission priorities and acceptable risks for the SIGINT Enterprise over the next 12-18 months.
(By "risk", we mean the chance that some significant event or development will occur in a target
area we've deemed to be of lower priority.) We derive the Mission List from the Intelligence
Community National Intelligence Priorities Framework, DNI Guidance, the Strategic Warning List
and other strategic planning documents.
What Missions are included on the SIGINT Strategic Mission List?
(S//SI) The SIGINT Strategic Mission List includes 15 critical missions, listed in priority order:
mission list .
How are Enduring Targets treated on the Strategic Mission List?
(S//SI) In addition to the 15 critical functional missions, the Strategic Mission List also includes
5 enduring targets (countries) that are included due to their strategic importance. These
missions are regarded as "trump cards" which at any given time can compete with the highest
priority thematic missions on the list. Elements of these targets also overlap with the thematic
target sets. The current set of enduring targets on the Mission List includes: China, North Korea,
Iraq, Iran and Russia. The enduring targets are also reviewed and can be added or deleted as
requirements change.
What is included in each Mission?
(S//SI) For each of the 15 critical missions and each of the 5 Enduring Targets, the list includes:
1.  Focus Areas - -highest priority targets against which the SIGINT enterprise is placing
emphasis or focus. These are the "must do" targets for that mission.

 2.  Accepted Risks-- targets for which the SIGINT Enterprise is not providing optimal
coverage and therefore some risk is being taken for that mission.
The list is not intended to be all encompassing, but is intended to set forth guidance on highest
priorities. Many targets are still worked within each mission despite not being listed as Focus
Areas.
Rolling Out the Strategic Mission List to the Global SIGINT Enterprise
(S//SI) Using the Worldwide VTC as a forum, we have begun to roll out the Mission Discernment
process and the Strategic Mission List to NSA/CSS Regional Centers and field sites. We have
asked them to start thinking about where they see themselves in the Strategic Mission List,
where they place the most emphasis, what impact the list has had on their processes, etc. We
have also provided the list to NCRs and CSGs and -- with the April version of the list -- will be
asking our senior representatives to share the list directly with our customers. This will provide a
new level of transparency as to what we are able to do well and where we are taking some risks
- good for us and good for our customers.
(S) The following chart depicts the Mission Discernment process: process diagram .
(U//FOUO) To learn more about Mission Discernment or to access a copy of the current version
of the SIGINT Strategic Mission visit the Mission Discernment homepage on Web World ("go
mission discernment") For additional information on the list contact the Strategic Intelligence
Issues Office and SINIO Council, 963-2228.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 