DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) SID Helping the Nation in Another Way: Through the CFC
FROM: MG Richard Quirk, USA
Signals Intelligence Director
Run Date: 10/04/2005

(U) Kicking off the annual charity campaign.
One of the great privileges of serving as the Signals Intelligence Director is leading the women
and men who do so much for our nation. Your selfless sacrifices and your dedication to our
important work is an inspiration representative of what makes America great.
That same spirit is reflected in your record of giving through the annual Combined Federal
Campaign that begins tomorrow for the 2005-2006 cycle.
SID has always been a leader in helping to extend NSA's impact on our nation's well-being
beyond the bounds of our intelligence mission. Last year NSA again led Central Maryland in
giving with a total of $1.8 million of which the Signals Intelligence Directorate contributed nearly
$750,000, exceeding our goal by 16%. Amazingly, this level of support reflects the generosity of
only 20% of the SID work force. Imagine the impact we could have on so many lives if SID could
match rates of participation like ITD at 29%, Corporate Staff at 32% or I&L at 37%.
Sadly, there are many new reasons to give this year. We are all aware of the tragic
consequences of Hurricane Katrina and some of us have felt the impact on a personal level.
Many of you have already generously made expressions of help, but the needs will linger long
after the initial surge of giving. The Combined Federal Campaign provides a convenient method
for your to spread your contributions over the course of a year in a way that will sustain many
relief organizations when they'll need help the most.
Beyond the very visible needs of the Gulf Coast, the Combined Federal Campaign provides as
many opportunities for giving as there are people and interests in our diverse work force.
Whatever your cause, whatever your passion, whatever your need -- there is an outlet to
express yourself. If you already have a giving plan, consider giving to that same organization
through the Combined Federal Campaign. If you've never given or have been unable to do so,
please at least commit to browsing the opportunities -- you may be surprised at the variety of
organizations who depend on this Campaign to continue their work. No donation is too small and
your choice of giving is a private matter easily transacted through the convenient web format at
the Campaign homepage:
CFC homepage
Join me in making your contribution tomorrow, 5 October, as part of the Campaign kick-off. I've
asked that progress toward the ambitious SID goal of $750k be tracked on SID today
homepage. The slate of SID Campaign leads listed there will be available to help you and answer
your questions throughout the Campaign.
Thank you again for all of you do on behalf of a grateful nation.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 