DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Reflections on NSA by a Special Operations Commander
FROM:
Iraq Issue Manager (S3)
Run Date: 06/28/2005

(S) NSA recently hosted a visit by Rear Admiral William McRaven, Deputy Commander,
Task Force Omaha. Admiral McRaven met with a variety of individuals and organizations that
provide support to Special Operations Forces (SOF) missions in both the Iraq and
Afghanistan/Pakistan AORs*, and in the process was updated on ongoing activities of interest
and concern to the SOF Community.
(S) In addition to being heavily engaged in the briefings and discussions that transpired
throughout the day, Admiral McRaven also took opportunity to relay his great appreciation for
the ongoing and continuous support that NSA provides to the SOF missions. Admiral McRaven
spoke quite openly and personally to those "in the room," but it was clear that he was really
speaking to the NSA community at large. Summarized below are a few of the paraphrased
thoughts expressed by Admiral McRaven during his visit -- thoughts that he would have
undoubtedly shared personally with each of us, had time and opportunity allowed. Please take a
moment and read these thoughts, and just for a moment shed your humility and be proud of the
work that we are doing in support of this critical fight. (RDML McRaven is certainly proud!!)
Speaking on NSA Staff as Critical Members of the TF Omaha Team...
(S) I was recently asked by a senior military commander to comment on the success of the TF
Omaha operations in theater. As I relayed the significant and absolutely critical support provided
by organizations like the NSA, it became clear to me that there was a lack of appreciation for the
depth and breadth of support that NSA provides. I was able to share with this senior leader that
although our Special Forces teams are responsible for the final end-game action, we are heavily
reliant on the support provided by our NSA teammates to achieve our success, and absent that
support, TF Omaha would certainly not achieve the level of success that we currently enjoy.
Speaking on Expeditionary Cryptology...
(S) Everywhere I visited today I ran into and became re-acquainted with NSA staff that I had
first known through their direct support to the SOF mission in either the Iraq or Af/Pak AORs.
You are successfully leveraging the unique expertise and experiences developed during your
staff's tenure in theater by placing them in SOF support roles upon their return home. This
clearly demonstrates how your Expeditionary Cryptology focus continues to pay dividends long
after the initial deployment is over.
Speaking on the Impact of SIGINT on SOF Operations...
(S//SI) TF Omaha operations in the Iraq theater are almost exclusively INTEL driven -- roughly
40% driven by HUMINT, and 60% based on SIGINT. However, whereas the HUMINT is often
imprecise and sometimes leads to tactical "dry holes", our SIGINT leads typically yield about a
90-95% success ratio -- when SIGINT says a target is "there", it's typically there.
Speaking on the Difference that NSA Is Making In the Fight...
(U//FOUO) You may not see it so clearly back here at NSAW, but I can tell you that on a daily
basis I see, very clearly, how your efforts both here at home as well as in the theater are
making a difference. You are in the fight, and you are significantly enhancing our combat
operations. By doing so you are saving lives, not only of Iraqi citizens, but more importantly you
are saving lives of our troops. And as the guy sending troops out on very dangerous missions, I
greatly appreciate every advantage we can glean.

 *(U) Note: 
AOR = Area of Responsibility 

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 