DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) SIGINT on the Go: Tablet PCs in London
FROM:
Delivery Techniques (S1222)
Run Date: 03/22/2005

Use of lightweight, mobile computers to reduce tedious paper handling at customer locations.
(U//FOUO)
(U//FOUO) NSA is now operating in an era where information technology is omnipresent.
Computer based tools enable analysts to increase productivity and accountability, while
decreasing the cost and usage of resources. S12 is ambitiously pursuing the modernization of
the SIGINT dissemination architecture by transforming many of the manual processes to
electronic processes.
(U//FOUO) Many of our SIGINT customers are not connected to NSANet, and must receive this
product by alternative means. This alternative usually translates to a tedious and laborious
process that must be endured daily by our forward-deployed analysts. Due to the degree of
labor involved in the manual preparation of the SIGINT product, this extraneous procedure often
times prevents analysts from participating in activities that will better assist their customers.
(U//FOUO) SUSLOL * analysts recognized this problem and the need for change. Analysts
residing in the SUSLOL offices are required to manually filter through the released reports of
multiple databases and manually select the reports that would be interest to each customer. The
reports must then be printed, collated, stapled, and customized to the desire of each customer.
Next, the product must then be hand delivered to each customer. In many cases, the analyst
must remain with the customer as the product is read, after which, the customer returns the
product to the analyst. Finally, the analyst returns to his office, manually logs each report that
was produced earlier that day for accountability purposes, and then disposes of the product by
shredding each sheet of paper.
(U//FOUO) The Tablet PC will be used to facilitate the aforementioned process. The
Tablet PC physically offers a better solution to protect the end product. The write and print
capabilities are disabled on the Tablet PC , preventing the reproduction of SIGINT, and it also
affords a better system for accountability. It is almost impossible to maintain positive
surveillance of each sheet of paper that is produced each day, in addition to attending primary
job functions. Using the tablet eliminates the logging of each sheet of paper and accounts for
only a USB* and the Tablet PC itself. The Tablet PC also offers the benefits of a searching
capability to quickly locate important information and portability.
(U//FOUO) S12 and SUSLOL are currently working together to accredit the Tablet PC for their
spaces, but every great effort comes with great obstacles. NSA Regulations state that the
environment in which material is processed must be commensurate with the classification level
of the material. This precept itself inhibits many of our non-NSANet customers from receiving
SIGINT either manually or electronically.
(U//FOUO) Adhering to the NISCAP* accreditation process, we have received preliminary
accreditation to operate. SUSLOL analysts will be able to employ the Tablet PC to deliver and
view SIGINT product in non-SCIF* areas within the Embassy. We are continuing to work with
IAD to satisfy the requirements for a secure hardened Tablet PC. This is a big achievement for
the Agency and a small step towards secure wireless dissemination.

(U//FOUO) U.S. Embassy London -- home of SUSLOL

 *(U) Notes: 
SUSLOL: Special United States Liaison Office London 
USB: Universal Serial Bus 
NISCAP: NSA/CSS Information System Security Certification and Accreditation Process 
SCIF: Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility 

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 