DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) A Very Southern City
FROM:
GRSOC, J303
Run Date: 02/11/2005

A civilian who "got in on the ground floor" at GRSOC describes life
in the Augusta area (U)
(U//FOUO) It has been said by some in our peculiar business that a
shop sometimes becomes like its target. Given the growth both in
the Augusta area and in the Fort Gordon Regional Security
Operations Center, one could say that the station is mirroring its
host area.
(U) Augusta, Georgia, and the surrounding area, known to the
locals as the Central Savannah River Area, or CSRA, has grown by
leaps and bounds over the past 6 years. While the city of
Augusta/Richmond County touts itself as the second-largest city in
Georgia, it still has somewhat of a small-town feeling -- a great
contrast to the crowded Baltimore-Washington corridor. Taking the
correct route, it is still possible, even during rush hour, to go from
one side of the city to the other in about a half-hour.
(U) Augusta is a very southern city set in a very southern area. It
is not unusual to see a rebel jack or an old Georgia state flag
decorating a house or pickup truck, and there are still some who
are suspicious of those who come from north of, say, Charlotte NC.
But, overall, Augusta's southern hospitality shows through in its
friendly people and moderately paced lifestyle. And, given the size
of the area, one could not ask for a more family-friendly
environment.
(U) Lake Thurmond, a large artificial lake created by the damming
of of the Savannah river north of Augusta, is only 20 to 30 minutes
away from Ft Gordon, providing boating, fishing and camping
opportunities for those who need to get away from it all. For those
who enjoy watching sports, Augusta has minor league baseball and
hockey teams. Should you need major league entertainment,
Atlanta is only two hours to the west and Charlotte two and a half
hours to the northeast. And, while Augusta will never host a
Superbowl, it is the home to major competitions in barrel horse
racing, cutting (cutting off one calf from a herd while on
horseback), speed boat racing, and, of course, the Masters Golf
Tournament.
(U) Augusta does have a symphony orchestra, theater groups both
in the city and out at Ft Gordon, and numerous movie theaters and
restaurants. One can find Mexican, Italian, German, Greek, Indian,
Chinese, and, of course, homestyle southern food without any
trouble. And if you need to work off the meal, gyms and sports
clubs are located throughout the area. I have even taken up
fencing during my stay here.
(S//SI) The GRSOC has already been around for 10 years;
however one could argue that it is now really hitting its stride.

 SERIES: 
(U) SID Around the
World '05
1.  Paradise Found
2.  A Very Southern City
3.  Stress Doesn't Live
Here
4.  Remember the
Alamo!
5.  The 'Other' End-toEnd SIGINT Site in
the UK
6.  Letter from Oz

 While the last of the original missions phased in almost 6 years
ago, GRSOC has changed with the changing Middle East -- and
expanding to meet these challenges. Our targets have been in the
thick of things since 9/11 -- Iraq and Afghanistan are worked here
-- which has meant a high ops-tempo and sometimes long hours.
However the increased workload has also meant higher visibility in
the SIGINT community and an increased awareness of one's
contribution to national security.
(U//FOUO) Ft Gordon is by far the most "military" place I have
ever worked. The main mission of the post is the training of
members of the Army Signal Corps. Not having prior service, I had
to get used to the ubiquitous drill sergeants marching formations of
young troops from place to place, occasionally dropping one or two
for push-ups if an infraction of etiquette or discipline warranted.
Because the GRSOC civilian contingent is currently relatively small
in comparison to the military workforce, one learns quickly the
culture of the various services.
(S) At first, the fast-paced work combined with a slower, southern
lifestyle may seem like a strange mix. However, despite the growth
of both the GRSOC and the CSRA, there is still a feeling of small
town/small site friendliness. My family and I have enjoyed our
years in the CSRA, and we are looking forward watching the area
and the station grow.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 