DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Collecting SIGINT Success Stories
FROM:
SIGINT Planning, Programming and Execution (S01X)
Run Date: 05/04/2005

Share your accomplishments with our customers, stakeholders and work force (U)
(U) Did you ever feel so proud of something you'd accomplished at work that you couldn't wait
to tell someone? Have you already written a Success Story and briefed it to the A&P showcase?
Or maybe you have already provided a Success Story to leadership or NSOC etc.? If you
answered YES to any of these questions here's an opportunity to let our customers, stakeholders
and workforce know about it! Please forward your Success Story to us and have it showcased.
(U//FOUO) As a part of performance management, SO1X collects Success Stories from each of
the Directorates and the Extended Enterprise. These stories are utilized in a variety of NSA
reports that are distributed to our shareholders. SIGINT Planning, Programming, and
Performance (SO1X) is responsible for overseeing the development and execution of the SIGINT
Enterprise business goals and objectives.
(TS//SI) Success Stories are a great way to share your accomplishments. The stories can range
from how NSA provided SIGINT during the Iraqi elections to how we assisted with security at the
Pope's funeral. The stories showcase the end-results and impact of NSA's hard work.
(TS//SI) We utilize Success Stories in various publications, such as the Performance and
Accountability Report (PAR), which is shown internally to leadership, as well as to, the Office of
Management and Budget, Department of Defense, other Intelligence Agencies, second party
partners and officials in Congress. Success Stories are also an integral part of the SIGINT
Accomplishments Report, an internal report used to highlight the SIGINT Enterprise strategies
and progress towards NSA Goals. In addition, Success Stories also appear in The Director's
Budget Testimony.
(U) Ready to share your story? Just contact one of the POCs in the Directorates listed below. If
you do not fall under any of the listed Directorates, submit your story directly to the S01X POC.
Please, follow the submission directions below to ensure that your story is properly formatted for
submission into NSA's documents. We look forward to hearing from you soon.
(U//FOUO) POCs:
S1 Customer Relationships Directorate: 
S2 Analysis & Production:
S3 Data Acquisition: 
All other areas / S01X: 
(U) Formatting Directions:
1.  SIGINT success stories should read like a short news clip--not too technical, easy for a
non NSA employee to understand, exciting to read.
2.  The text description of each success story should be 250 words or less.
3.  Each story should include a POC name and phone number.
4.  The accomplishment must have taken place during FY 2005 (although it may have
spanned prior fiscal years, and only been completed in FY 2005).
5.  Success stories should be written to a classification no higher than TS/COMINT/5 EYES.

 6.  Include graphics if at all possible. Electronic images should be of photo quality (density at
300 dpi, not interpolated up to 300 from a 72 dpi by the computer from a web page, for
example). Hardcopy photographs are ideal and will be returned if required. JPG files are
typically not useable for a printed document.
7.  If the success story is related to an Agency Strategic Goal or Objective, please note the
one that is most closely identified with the accomplishment.
8.  If any names or clearly recognizable photos of individuals are used, a signed waiver
should be included that allows the Agency to publish that individual's name and/or
photograph.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 