DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Leadership 'TIPS' for Turbulent Times
FROM: Charles Berlin
SID/Assistant Deputy Director for Customer Relationships (S1)
Run Date: 05/04/2005

(U) Tried-and-true leadership techniques
(U//FOUO) Unless you've been on the moon, you have probably noticed there is an enormous
level of turbulence these days. We have a new Director of National Intelligence and our very own
Lt. Gen. Hayden has been promoted to four stars and has moved to the Deputy Director of
National Intelligence -- are you wondering (like I am) how he likes being a deputy now? J We
have a new Mission Directorate, the Information Technology Directorate (ITD), forming up; and
if you are in SID or IAD you are watching the concept of "mission blending" create joint centers
where our two missions are coming together.
(U//FOUO) All this turbulence creates a bunch of new positions and the need for people to fill
them. Lots of people have been swept along in this turbulence already -- some have quickly
been assigned to the centers and some to the DNI watch center. Some even volunteered! J I'm
not sure General Hayden had a choice. If he did, it was a fairly narrow set of choices, I bet.
Anyway, it will take all our creativity and focus as leaders to make these new
constructs a success. It will also take a concerted effort by our people to make these changes
into a better way to save lives and protect our nation. Leaders will also have to take on the
challenge of bridging our people through these times.
(U) All this turbulence has an unsettling (pun intended) effect on people. Anytime there is
uncertainty, people feel a little threatened and worried about the future. Of course, I think the
future is bright and full of promise and opportunity -- but then, I'm an incurable optimist. If you
are a leader you have a job to do in these times. As it turns out, the main antidote to the
worries caused by uncertainty and turbulence is Leadership . But what should a leader do?
(U) When I was a Lieutenant Colonel I had the privilege to work for an outstanding General
named Thomas Schwartz. He mentored us often and used the acronym "TIPS" to guide our
interaction with our people. "TIPS" stands for:
T : TALK to people -- engage them in real conversation, explore their situation and get to
know them; find out their hopes and dreams. Find out what they are worried about.
I : Keep our people INFORMED -- let them know the latest information. Reduce rumors
and fill in the blanks with good information. It's OK to let them know plans before they
are firm -- they can handle it. Don't wait until things are 100% certain; they never will
be.
P : Make their lives PREDICTABLE. People need something to count on. Emphasize the
enduring nature of our mission and the constant knowledge that they can count on their
colleagues and leaders as we deal with the changes.
S : Be SENSITIVE to their needs. Our great advantage in our mission is our people. Their
needs are important to our success. Attending to their needs is literally the maintenance
of this critical "system" (the "wetware").
(U) General Schwartz used to say, "When in doubt, do TIPS!" I have used this mantra many
times since and it always helps. It has a universal application but has the best effect in turbulent
times. Don't forget to network with other leaders. TIPS applies to them too. Encourage your
peers to get involved. Ask them about the pulse of their organization and what's bothering their
people. Chances are, the same issues exist in your organization too. Keep yourself and your
peers informed about the latest concepts and thinking. A leader should be the most informed
person in any group -- for issues above and below.

 (U) In desperate circumstances a leader's first responsibility is to keep hope alive . Our times of
organizational change are hardly desperate but keeping hope alive is what TIPS is all about.
How we do things will change and keep changing but our mission to protect the lives and way of
life we cherish is an enduring one. Our mission will always need good, solid Americans to
perform it. It will always need leaders who can make a difference by carrying those great
Americans through the turbulence of change with optimism and caring interest in their future.
Start your day doing TIPS and see for your self.
(U) p.s. BTW, I once asked General Schwartz if the first letter should really be "L" for LISTEN to
people. He said yes -- he really meant for us to listen BUT as an Infantry General, he just
couldn't bring himself to adopt "LIPS" as a motto! J

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 