DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) Getting a Complete Picture of Our SIGINT Clients
FROM: 
Program Manager CRMi (S11)
Run Date: 10/31/2005

(U//FOUO) CRM initiative to help SID get to know its clients in great detail.
(U) Humankind's ability to communicate through art has progressed from simple cave drawings,
to flat medieval frescos, and ultimately to paintings from the Renaissance where the use of
light, shadow, foreshortening, and perspective had been perfected. CRM (Customer Relationship
Management) and its associated strategies, methodologies and technologies have also developed
over time.
(U) CRM, within the agency, began as personal relationships, maintained by individuals.
Technologies such as e-mail were then introduced to help "manage" these individual
relationships. Other software applications were then brought into the mix to capture specific
actions and activities such as customer success stories and SID visits.
(U) We currently live in an environment where our views and supporting technologies can at
best only give us one perspective of the customer, our client. At no one time do we have a
complete picture of the client; we are left with best guess, speculation, and experience in order
to drive our internal mission, goals, and resources. Even with the best cryptologic resources in
the world, we don't always get "it" right.
(U) So how do we move from a flat one-view perspective of our clients to a canvas where the
colors are vibrant, the depth of field complete, and the perspective clear, giving us a more
holistic and complete picture of the client?
(U//FOUO) CRMi
(U//FOUO) CRMi is a new CRM initiative originating from The Customer Gateway (S11), which
gives us the opportunity to start with a clean canvas. We will examine all current processes,
remove the poorly performing ones and place technology into the remaining best-of-breed
environment. This will mean taking broad strokes to some existing processes while others
receive a minimal "touchup." The new environment will give us a full representation of the client,
complete with light, shadow, foreshortening, and perspective.
(U//FOUO) CRM is the renaissance of a belief that at the heart of all transactions is the creation
of mutual value for all parties. CRMi will transform our collaboration with and about our clients,
placing them at the very core of the organization. In other words, CRMi will enable us to know
our clients as well as we know our targets. SID's organizing framework of "Get It - Know It - Use
It" as it relates to the collection of SIGINT can also be applied to the management of client
information rather than target information.
(U//FOUO) Get it 
(U//FOUO) We need to consistently gather information from all agency client touch points. These
touch points start within S11, working with SEAMs (Senior Executive Account Managers),
Account Managers, SIGINT Representatives and the SIGINT Contact Center (SCC) and then
gradually extending out into the entire enterprise. The information gathered from all these touch
points must be put into a place where it can easily be shared.
(U//FOUO) Know it 
(U//FOUO) SID will use this data to analyze needs and feedback, generate metrics, and mine for
business intelligence, creating an environment that allows the agency to see a complete picture
of our client.

 (U) Use it 
(U) Once we truly know our clients, this valuable information will be used to focus our missions
and resources. This will ensure our missions, goals and resources match directly to our client's
information needs and provide a mosaic of proactive SIGINT products and services.
(U) Stay tuned to additional SID today articles as the CRMi lifecycle progresses from contract
award to a fully integrated CRM solution.
(U//FOUO) Please contact
 in the Customer Gateway or visit the CRMi webpage to
access the CRMi CONOP Concept of Operations and for additional information. Your feedback and
comments are welcome.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 