DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) A Different World: First Impressions of a Cross-Training
Intelligence Analyst
FROM:
IADP, International Security Issues (S2C23)
Run Date: 08/31/2005

(U//FOUO) A budget/HR specialist experiences life as a SIGINT analyst.
(U) Having worked most of my career in the Agency support areas, I have always wanted to see
firsthand what the mission side is all about. After being accepted into the Intelligence Analysis
Cross-Training Program, I now am learning what analysts really do. Because I have worked the
mission indirectly from budget and human resources perspectives, I have always had great
respect for analysts and linguists, who serve as the "pulse" of the Agency. Now that I actually sit
in the same offices with them, I have an even greater admiration for the daily tasks they
perform and the frustrations they encounter.
(U//FOUO) Talk about multi-tasking! (I mean daily tasking as opposed to collection tasking,
which is also multi-faceted.) With all of the technological changes in the last decade and the
increasing amount of traffic, today's analyst is required to do much more with less manpower
and funding -- all in a day's work! While the Joint Military Intelligence College prepared me
theoretically, nothing could prepare me for an analyst's day-to-day activities. Luckily for those of
us new to this career field, the Agency's senior analysts are more than willing to share their
wealth of knowledge.
(U//FOUO) I am also surprised at how much non-SID and external customers underestimate the
amount of analysis required before the release of the final product. Today's analyst must be
adept at many computer systems and programs. My prior impression was that the analyst sat
down and typed the report, and the computer "magically" assigned the distribution and other
information. When I wrote my first report, it took me twice as long to identify the distribution,
the requirement numbers, and all of the other information as it did to write the actual report.
(U//FOUO) The Intelligence Analysis career field encompasses many facets of operations and
provides opportunities to perform a myriad of tasks. The analyst has the option to get involved
at the front end of collection tasking and at all points throughout the process as well. Of course,
prioritization and time management skills are absolutely essential. Although I love writing and
"analyzing," I have learned that there is so much more to intelligence analysis than I ever
imagined.
(U//FOUO) Even though it is later in my career, I am very grateful that I am no longer "on the
outside looking in" and can contribute in some small part to the mission.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 