DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Great Opportunities for Traveling SIGINTers
FROM: MG Richard Quirk, USA
Signals Intelligence Director
Run Date: 07/28/2005

(C) NSA will deploy over 330 people this year, most going to join Cryptologic Support Groups
(CSGs), and Cryptologic Support Teams (CSTs). NSA has so far established eight CSGs and five
CSTs to assist in the Global War on Terrorism, and more are on the way. All of our teams
receive tremendous praise for their timely and accurate reporting, which is vital to military
operations. However, our pool of volunteer analysts has not kept pace with the demand.
(C) We seek SIGINTers willing to volunteer for duty in Iraq, Afghanistan or the Horn of Africa.
Historically, we have depended on our veteran deployers to shoulder the burden of filling these
positions. In fact, over 90% of these personnel were willing to extend their tour or deploy again,
because they saw first hand the power of NSA in action. Unfortunately, we cannot continue to
rely on the same pool of individuals--the rest of us need to take our turn.
(U//FOUO) The men and women of SID who deploy with the CSTs and CSGs complete their job
each day knowing that they made a difference in the war. In many cases, the information they
provide saves lives. They find the job they did so rewarding that they come home grateful for
being given the opportunity to deploy.
(U//FOUO) Even if you currently do not specialize in the CENTCOM AOR, training will be
provided to ensure you have the tools needed to succeed, through VuPort classes, culture
studies, and an internship with the TOPI, for example.
(U//FOUO) Living conditions for our deployed personnel have improved. Most of our CSG and
CST personnel are living in air-conditioned trailers and some in converted houses. Cafeterias
offer four meals a day and shopettes for personal items. Our locations are very secure and
thankfully, have not had any injuries related to enemy action.
(U//FOUO) In addition, there are financial benefits to volunteering for one of these deployments.
Civilians are entitled to danger pay (up to 35% of an employee's base pay) and post differential
pay (adding another 25% on average, and up to 35%, based on your location). Deployed
civilians also qualify for overtime and performance awards. If you are in the military, your entire
month's salary is tax-free, and you receive per diem, monthly family separation, and hazardous
duty pay. Plus, if you reenlist while overseas, any bonus is tax free.
(U//FOUO) Supervisors: I commend you for encouraging your personnel to deploy. Although
their services are dearly missed at home, your office will benefit from the warfighter-tailored
worker who returns. Not only will your people return from deployment more focused, with a
sharpened understanding of NSA's mission, but also everyone in your office will learn from their
experience.
(U//FOUO) For information on deploying to CSGs/CSTs, please call the Expeditionary Group at
 or "go NIST." For information on all other SID deployment opportunities, please
contact 
 at 
. And, for more information concerning civilian pay benefits,
please contact the NSA Deployment Center at 
.
(U//FOUO) Whether you are civilian or military (active and reserve), we need your help. Not
only are the benefits remarkable, but the experience you receive, the overseas family you
create, and the national service you provide are priceless.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

 DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 