DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) The Crypto-Mathematics Institute Has the Formula
FROM: Joe McCloskey
CMI President
Run Date: 06/24/2005

(U//FOUO) The Crypto-Mathematics Institute (CMI) is the oldest of
the Learned Organizations at NSA. It was established by Lieutenant
General John A. Samford, Director, NSA, in a memorandum dated
October 1957. The CMI has been an integral part of the
mathematics community at NSA ever since its inception.
(U//FOUO) The purpose of the Institute is to promote those
aspects of mathematics which pertain to cryptology and to provide
a focal point for the NSA mathematics community in fields of
common interest. Its membership is open to anyone with an
interest in crypto-mathematics.
(U//FOUO) CMI sponsors a variety of social and scholarly events,
often in conjunction with an Agency office or the Professional
Health Program (PHP). Recently, on June 2-3, 2005, CMI and CES
co-sponsored MATHFEST . As part of MATHFEST, Professor Dan
Boneh of Stanford gave an invited talk on bilinear maps in
cryptography. Professor Boneh heads the applied crypto group at
the Computer Science Department at Stanford University. Dr.
Boneh's research focuses on applications of cryptography to
computer security. He is the author of over 70 publications in the
field. Dr. Boneh's work includes e-mail security, security for
handheld devices and web servers, digital copyright protection, and
cryptanalysis. He is a recipient of the Packard Award, the Alfred P.
Sloan Award, and the Terman Award.
(U//FOUO) This year's MATHFEST program also included eight
classified talks by members of the community on a wide range of
topics of current interest, including presentations on cryptanalysis,
statistics, applied mathematics, and computer science.
(U//FOUO) The Institute bestows a variety of honors at the annual
banquet: essay contest prizes, Distinguished Memberships,
Distinguished Service, CMI President's Award, and the CMI
Teaching Award.
The CMI Essay Contest was established in 1959 to
recognize outstanding written contributions to the fields of
mathematics and cryptology.
The Distiguished Members form the CMI Hall of Fame,
drawn from retirees in the extended classified mathematics
community.
The Distinguished Service Award is made to individuals
who have made significant contributions to the health of the
community.
Since 1978, the CMI President's Award (or
mathematician of the year) has recognized Agency
personnel who are making important contributions to the
mission of the cryptologic community through the

 SERIES: 
(U) Learned Orgs '05
1.  Have You Considered
Joining a Learned
Organization?
2.  The CryptoMathematics
Institute Has the
Formula
3.  The Crypto-Linguistic
Association
4.  The KRYPTOS Society
is No Mystery
5.  Form an Alliance:
Join the International
Affairs Institute
6.  NSA's 'Women in
Mathematics Society'

 development and application of the science of mathematical
cryptology.
The CMI Teaching Award was established in 1997 to
honor important teaching contributions to the mathematics
community.
(U//FOUO) These awards are given at the annual CMI banquet.
This year's banquet was held on Friday, June 3 at Snyder's Willow
Grove. In addition to the annual awards presentations, this year's
banquet included a special tribute to Dr. Richard Leibler, whose
contributions to mathematical practice and theory were crucial to
America's national security. His technical knowledge and
managerial abilities helped transform IDA into an institution that
kept NSA in the forefront of mathematical and cryprologic
capability in the 1960s and 1970s. Working together with Dr.
Solomon Kullback, Dr. Leibler devised a new method of measuring
similarity between populations; this statistical function bears their
name and is still used widely on a diverse set of different statistical
applications.
(U//FOUO) A complete listing of CMI officers and activities appears
on the internal website, 
 (or "go cmi").

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 