DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Read All About Us!
FROM: SIGINT Communications
Unknown
Run Date: 03/31/2005

(U//FOUO) This article was found deep in the SID today archives... Actual foreign news reports
with "little known" facts about NSA (taken from FBIS):
"In the direction of the Baltic Sea [as published*] and several miles from Washington, D.C., ...in
the United States, there is a military installation-like, unapproachable area called "Fort Meade,"
and they say that this area is not even indicated on maps and not many people are actually
interested in it." 
Description of Source: P'yongyang Nodong Sinmun in Korean Daily newspaper of the
Central Committee of the Workers Party of Korea 271342Z SEP 02
Interview with Tomislav Kresovic, political analyst for the Belgrade-based Bina Agency: "Our
people idealize the role of the CIA to such an extent that they consider it to be the biggest and
best secret service in the world. However, I believe that the US National Security Agency (NSA)
is the most powerful espionage agency and that it rules the world at the moment, because it is
capable of achieving total surveillance of our planet and implementing a strategy of total
espionage." 
Description of Source: Belgrade Nedeljni Telegraf in Serbo-Croatian -- privately owned
weekly tabloid with a large circulation; covers both official and opposition views.
101939Z JAN 02
"They did their work in silence, says the plaque dedicated to those who have fallen that greets
the few who succeed in entering Crypto City, the city of secrets. It consists of 60 buildings
surrounded by barbed wire and maple trees located between Washington and Baltimore. If,
instead of being ignored by all the maps, it were a real city, it would be the second largest in
Maryland. "Every day 38,000 employees, sworn not to reveal what they do even to their
children, park their cars around the two black buildings that hide two bunkers that are proofed
against any kind of interception. Inside work spies who have such abstruse titles as 'in charge of
anonymity,' or who produce newsletters with a warning under the letterhead: 'Destroy after
reading.' " 
Description of Source: Milan Panorama (Internet Version-WWW) in Italian -- right-ofcenter weekly news magazine. 291426Z MAY 01
(U) You can't believe everything you read!
*(U) Footnote: 
In case you are wondering about the seemingly bizarre reference to the Baltic Sea, a reader
sent in the following possible explanation: 
"Balti-more = Baltic Sea; "Mare" is the Latin word for "Sea" used in naming the dark, flat
regions of Earth's moon... "More" is "sea" in Russian, and maybe some other languages as
well... To say that Fort Meade is between Washington DC and the Baltic Sea is not an error of
geography is much as it is a matter of "excessive translation." It's sort of like attributing angelic
powers to anyone named "Michael." 

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet

 without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 