DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) OPSEC - Don't Forget About It!
FROM: Prudence the OPSEC Dragon
Sponsored by the SID OPSEC Program Office (S02L3)
Run Date: 11/17/2005

(U//FOUO) Hi there. It's Prudence the SID OPSEC mascot once again. It's been a while since
I've talked with you. So, I thought with the holidays approaching and so many of us making
travel plans and reservations, that it would be a good time to get out of my cave and stoke the
OPSEC fires a bit. We all may have repeatedly heard some of the tried but true OPSEC slogans,
such as " One Person's Trash is Another's Treasure ," " Loose Lips Sink Ships " and " Think
Before You Speak " are still worth some thought and attention especially in today's times and
conditions.
(U) Also, please keep in mind as you travel about locally, nationally and especially internationally
that those whom we consider our adversaries could be, and quite possibly are, nearby looking to
pick up on even the smallest nuggets of information that could give them some type of indication
of our intentions and plans. Make OPSEC a part of your daily routine both at work and in your
personal lives. To help, I've gathered a few hints and ideas as to what we should and shouldn't
do both in our personal and work-related environments.
(U) Know what types of personal, sensitive or critical unclassified information you may
want or need to protect
(U) Determine who may pose a risk to the information you've identified
(U) Look at how you conduct your business to see if you could possibly be putting your
information at risk
(U) Think about the cost, if any, if the information is lost to an adversary
(U) Protect information placed on the Internet, budget information (personal and official),
milestones and schedules as well as documents with personal or sensitive information
(U) Be cautious when and where you hold personal and or work-related discussions, use
wireless communication devices (cell phones, PEDs, etc) or send information out over
unclassified fax lines
(U) Vary your schedule and routine
(U) When you'll be away from home for any length of time, remember to stop your
newspaper delivery and your mail, turn-off the answering machine on your phone as well
as use variable timers for interior and exterior lights.
(U) Always be cautious when you are unexpectedly contacted by someone that you don't
know
(U) Pay attention to and report, if necessary, any unusual activities or individuals you
may see
(U) Don't let sales clerks, waitresses or others disappear from view with your credit or
debit cards
(U//FOUO) Before I go, I'd also like to give you a list of some external websites that you may
find useful. Check them out and see what you think.
http://www.ioss.gov
http://www.ftc.gov
http://www.ncix.gov

 http://globalsecurity.org
http://www.homelandsecurity.org/
http://www.staysafeonline.info
http://www.ag-security.com/
...And last but not least the SID OPSEC webpage which can be accessed by typing "go sidopsec"
into your browser.
(U//FOUO) I hope this information is useful for you and your families. And, as always, if you
have any questions about or suggestions as to how we can help strengthen our OPSEC posture,
please contact our OPSEC Program Manager in S02L3, 
 at 
 or 
 We'll be glad to talk with you and see what we can accomplish together.
(U) Well, I'm off to my lair to rest up a bit. But, please keep one thing in mind ... "OPSEC
doesn't end when you leave the office."

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 