DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(S//SI) Unusual Opportunities Await Language Cross-Trainees and
Interns
FROM:
Language Cross-Trainee (S2C22/R64)
Run Date: 09/27/2005

(U) Rotations in research are available...
(S//SI) When I signed up for the language cross-training program immediately after 9/11, I had
no idea of the variety of opportunities that would become available to me. Language interns and
cross-trainees can not only rotate through different branches in their newly acquired language,
but they can also do rotations in research (R6-Knowledge Discovery Research Group) as part of
a multi-language tour. (These rotation opportunties are listed on the Deployment Services web
page .) Being able to work part-time in research and part-time in operations has turned out to
be the optimal situation for me as an NSA linguist who wants to help lead NSA out of the "reelto-reel world" and into the future of leading edge technologies.
(S//SI) I have been very fortunate to be able to work a part-time research tour in R64 (Human
Language Technologies) while continuing to work in my operational language, Pashto. When first
looking into a multi-language tour, I was reluctant to go on a full-time 6 month or more tour in
research fearing that my abilities in my newly acquired language would suffer. But my branch
management in S2A44 (Trans-Asia, Afghanistan Branch), and in my follow-on assignment to
S2C22 (Follow-the-Money), were very enlightened in understanding the necessity and value of
having operational linguists integrated with researchers to assist in developing language tools
that address the ever more difficult SIGINT challenge.
(S//SI) Currently my work in R64 entails developing a futuristic (and realistic) user interface for
a speech-to-text transcription capability under project OVENCAPTIVE. My experience, input, and
opinions as a voice language analyst and transcriber are valued highly by the engineers and
computer scientists I work with here. We are also exploring using OVENCAPTIVE as an
educational tool, and recently briefed OVENCAPTIVE to members of the Language Enhancement
Program and language teachers at NCS. Several of the teachers are eager to work with us to
incorporate their classified transcription classes into the OVENCAPTIVE tool.
(S//SI) Another of my goals is to develop an on-line phonetically searchable Pashto dictionary,
and to apply whatever lessons are learned to developing on-line phonetically searchable
dictionaries in other poorly documented languages.
(U//FOUO) All of this and more is available to language interns and cross-trainees. Make it a
priority to explore the rotations that are available to you, and consider a tour in research. Your
ideas are valuable!

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 