DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) Redesign of A&P
FROM: MG Richard Quirk, USA
Signals Intelligence Director
Run Date: 05/18/2005

(U//FOUO) I have approved a proposal from Carl Johnson, Deputy Director for Analysis and
Production, to redesign the Analysis and Production Directorate to align our "Know It" mission in
a manner consistent with the strategic direction and expectations stemming from Intelligence
Community, NSA and SID plans. The new framework will optimize DDAP's existing strengths to
operate in a seamless, global, net-centric environment. This proposal includes the creation of
new roles to address the strategic, capabilities-based, and end-to-end operational
responsibilities that will define the direction of our enterprise. A forthcoming Personnel
Assignment Order "Green Sheet" will identify the individuals selected to fill these positions; in
the meantime, I want to acquaint you with the new positions, and the scope of responsibility
entailed.
(U//FOUO) Group Chiefs : Responsible for the Analysis and Production System worldwide -"keeping it relevant." Also responsible for transformation initiatives; community horizontal
integration; knowledge management; interface standards with CRD , DA , SIGDEV , IAD .
Global Capabilities Managers (GCM): Responsible for end-to-end Operations of the Product
Line; assigns mission responsibilities to production centers; works with Cryptologic Center chiefs
to align resources, understand and maintain capabilities; optimizes across national and tactical
missions.
Primary Production Center Managers (PPCM): Manages the Production Center (the
Production Line "center of gravity"). In that role, the PPCM reports to and backs up the GCM to
coordinate and optimize worldwide production and current operations.
Production Center Leads (PCL): Responsible for the day-to-day operations of a Production
Center.
Cryptologic Centers : Centers of cryptologic capability, including but not limited to analysis
and production capability, with broad regional, technical, and/or target focus.
Production Centers : Can vary in size from ~200 analysts at a large Cryptologic Center to a
single analyst at an F6 site. Production Centers are authorized by the GCM to analyze and
disseminate SIGINT on a specified set of targets.
(U//FOUO) The redesign of A&P will align similar missions in discrete management structures;
for example, all missions focused on nation-states or geographic regions will operate under one
of the Group Chiefs. By this means, missions with comparable kinds of targets, using similar
kinds of information and communications systems, and collaborating with many of the same
types of customers and partners, will be organized under a Group Chief who will deal with issues
relating to their resources, their requirements for collection, and their customer demands.
Apportioning these responsibilities across the three new Group Chiefs also eliminates an
impossible span of control problem for DDAP -- trying to maintain comprehensive awareness of
the issues and actions of 12 different product lines. The GCMs will be responsible for the global
operations of the product line, overseeing the operations of the PPCM, PCLs, and other analysis
and production activities. The leaders in those elements are responsible for the day-to-day
operations. This change separates two very challenging functions and should result in a better
focus on the operation of the entire product line.
(U//FOUO) Carl has commissioned two transition teams to further define and implement this
structure; look for further communications from him providing additional information on this
important S2 redesign on the S2 website:

 "(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 