DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Announcing the Birth of the JFCC-ISR
FROM:
SID Senior Representative to JFCC-ISR (S3)
Run Date: 06/21/2005

(U//FOUO) On May 31st the Joint Functional Component Command for Intelligence, Surveillance
and Reconnaissance (JFCC-ISR) achieved its initial operating capability (IOC) in the Pentagon.
"So what?" you might ask. Well, the "so what" turns out to be pretty significant for all Combat
Support Agencies, including NSA.
(U//FOUO) First, let's define what ISR means. According to the C4ISR Handbook for Integrated
Planning (April 1998 edition):
Intelligence is the collection, processing, integration, analysis, evaluation and interpretation of
information.
Surveillance is the systematic observation of aerospace, surface or subsurface areas, places,
persons or things by visual, aural, electronic, photographic or other means.
Reconnaissance is a mission undertaken to obtain by visual observation or other detection
methods, information about the activities and resources of an enemy or potential enemy or to
secure data concerning the meteorological, hydrographic, or geographic characteristics of a
particular area controlled by or of potential use by an adversary.
(U//FOUO) JFCC ISR is a component of US Strategic Command, and has the mission of "planning
to employ DoD ISR resources to meet Combatant Command, national and DoD requirements."
For the first time, representatives of the NGA, NSA, DIA* and the Services will co-locate to
conduct specific ISR planning, monitor the execution of those plans, and provide a real time
graphical display of the conduct of those missions. This is a huge undertaking that holds the
promise of improving the way that we collect, process and distribute intelligence worldwide. The
JFCC ISR will be developing metrics to measure the effectiveness of ISR missions in response to
validated Information Needs (IN), and recommending adjustments to improve satisfaction of
those INs.
(U//FOUO) Initial operations for the JFCC ISR are taking place in the Pentagon at the Defense
Collection Coordination Center, but will move to newly renovated spaces in DIA within the next
six to eight months. The Director, NSA/CSS and his Lead for ISR Jim Cusick have been involved
from the outset last year helping to develop the CONOP (Concept of Operations) for the
component and playing a significant role in helping to shape the JFCC into a construct that will
assist the warfighter and improve the interaction between national and tactical intelligence
capabilities. 
 was recently named to be the first SID Senior Representative to this
JFCC. As the scope and daily activities of the component are better identified, additional
representation will be needed.
(U//FOUO) This is a unique opportunity to finally deploy the nation's ISR assets in a fully
coordinated and transparent manner which has the potential to provide the warfighter as well as
the policy-making community with better intelligence in the most efficient, effective way
possible. While IOC is a necessary benchmark, a great deal of groundbreaking work will need to
be done by professionals dedicated to optimizing the system before we realize the full potential
of this effort. When the call goes out to fill those additional positions, you will want to give
serious consideration to being a part of this history-making effort.
(U//FOUO) If you have any questions in the interim, feel free to contact

*(U) Notes: 

 S3, 

 NGA = National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency 
DIA = Defense Intelligence Agency 

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 