DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Form an Alliance: Join the International Affairs Institute
FROM: Brenda Martineau
IAI member
Run Date: 07/22/2005

Another in our series of NSA Learned Orgs... (U)

 SERIES: 
(U) Learned Orgs '05

Essay Contest
(U//FOUO) The International Affairs Institute (IAI) is currently
running its annual essay contest with this year's theme of "
Opportunities and Challenges Ahead for the Director and Deputy
Director of National Intelligence ".
(U//FOUO) This is your chance to give your views on the
opportunities and challenges facing the Intelligence Community
under the new DNI structure. If your essay is one of those
selected, it will be read by senior Community leadership -- and you
will receive a cash prize! For more information please go to the
essay contest webpage . (The deadline for entries is 1 August.)
About the IAI...
(U//FOUO) The IAI has been reaching out to the workforce for over
30 years, presenting to the NSA workforce a variety of
distinguished speakers from government, industry, and academia.
The IAI is a member of NSA's Council of Learned Organizations and
its aim is to promote an interest in international events and affairs
while providing unique insights into those issues. In addition to the
essay contest, the IAI pursues its mission through the following
activities:
The International Challenge : Open to all NSA employees, the
annual International Challenge is an unclassifed written contest
which consists of 100 multiple-choice questions on the following
topics: international and domestic affairs, politics, economics,
history, current events, the military, and geography. Cash prizes
are awarded to the participants achieving the top three scores.
Speaker Series : One of the IAI's highest priorities is to arrange
for speakers to address the NSA workforce on matters of current
international interest. Recent speakers have included:
Ms. Theresa Loar, Vice President for Global Strategies at
CH2M Hill and former adviser to First Lady Hillary Clinton
and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, speaking on "
Gender and Security "
Dr. Lawrence Korb, Senior Fellow, Center for American
Progress and former USD(Manpower, Facilities and
Resources), speaking on " A New Security Strategy in an
Age of Terrorists, Tyrants, and Weapons of Mass Destruction
"
Ambassador James C Rosapepe, former U.S. Ambassador to
Romania and Member of the Maryland House of Delegates,

1.  Have You Considered
Joining a Learned
Organization?
2.  The CryptoMathematics
Institute Has the
Formula
3.  The Crypto-Linguistic
Association
4.  The KRYPTOS Society
is No Mystery
5.  Form an Alliance:
Join the International
Affairs Institute
6.  NSA's 'Women in
Mathematics Society'

 speaking on " Old Europe Plus New Europe: Minus Russia:
Clash of Civilizations? "
Dr. Bard E. O'Neill, Professor of National Security Strategy
and Director of Studies of Political Violence and Terrorism at
the National War College, speaking on " Analyzing
Insurgencies: An Holistic Approach "
Book Sales: IAI hosts book sales that offer members the
opportunity to sell their books about international relations and
pick up some new titles.
(U//FOUO) The organization is also extremely well connected to
the IA (Intelligence Analysis) Intern program. An intern sits on the
IAI Board, and the organization has recently instituted a new policy
granting membership to all IA Intern new-hires, free of charge for
their first year. This recruitment tool has been very successful, and
has prompted IAI to reach out to the other skill-field communities
with a similar membership agreement offer.
(U//FOUO) Membership : IAI is currently encouraging new
membership and has 3 positions coming available on the Board of
Governors. Elections will take place the first week of August. If you
would like to join IAI as a general member or nominate yourself for
a Board position, please contact 
 (
).
(U//FOUO) For more information on this organization, visit the
International Affairs Institute webpage ("go IAI").

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 