DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Some Info on 'Compensatory Time Off for Travel'
FROM: 
SID Human Resources Service Center (MD6)
Run Date: 11/10/2005

(U) The entire text is unclassified.
MD6 has received numerous inquiries from members of the SID workforce about compensatory
time-off for travel ("travel comp"), a benefit that became effective on January 28th of this year.
Here's some guidance to help you:
Compensatory Time-Off for Travel is a new form of compensatory time-off that was
authorized under the Federal Workforce Flexibility Act of 2004. Travel comp:
Is approved for certain travel hours in a temporary duty (TDY) status,
Must be outside regular duty hours,
Is only compensable with approved time-off (comp time),
Is not otherwise compensable with premium pay,
Never converts into cash,
Is forfeited if not used within 26 pay periods, and
Does not count against either the premium or aggregate pay limitations
When preparing for a TDY:
Travel comp must be pre-approved and should be coordinated with the supervisor and
employee prior to travel.
To provide the most flexibility during the TDY, you should change your work schedule to
reflect AWS 4. This will allow you to vary your start and end times during travel and duty
time.
Before traveling, you should keep the following information in mind:
When on domestic or international flights, record all travel hours using the clock at your
point of departure. For example, if you departed at noon and traveled for 4 hours, you
would record your time of arrival as 1600, rather than the actual local time.
You should arrive at the required reporting time, as determined by the carrier or airport
(i.e. longer for international flights).
There are mandatory meal periods which are not compensable.
The best plan is to develop your own method of convenience for documenting and figuring out
travel time hours.
Travel Time:
When traveling from a permanent duty station to a TDY site, travel time begins with
the mandatory reporting time at the transportation terminal and ends upon arrival at the
destination location (i.e. the hotel or TDY site).
When traveling from a TDY site to a permanent duty station, travel time begins when
you depart from the hotel (in order to arrive at the mandatory reporting time at the
transportation terminal) and ends with your arrival at the destination airport.
* Note : if TDY travel is for commercial training, compensation will be with regular comp time
hours, not travel comp hours.

 Please note that the following travel times cannot be compensated:
Travel within the local community area
Normal commuting time
Extended delays
Meal periods
Need help?
Should you have a question and need to contact your appropriate HR representative, please
have the following information available:
Your AWS code, administrative workdays, and normal duty hours
The type of TDY (i.e. mission/operational or training)
Your TDY dates, to include authorized early departure and/or delayed return travel and
authorized use of personal leave in conjunction with the TDY
Guidance for claiming and using travel comp hours can be found on the following website:

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 