DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Christmas in Iraq
FROM: Donna L. Rober
(C) Data Acquisition Lead - Iraq
Run Date: 01/07/2005

A SIGINTer deployed to Baghdad passes on her thoughts from the front. Ms. Rober is one month
into a 4-month tour. (C)
(U//FOUO) Months ago as I sat at home watching the headlines filled with the latest casualties
in Iraq, I, like so many other Americans, wondered why we were sacrificing our troops in a
country that obviously didn't want us there. When the call came asking me to deploy to
Baghdad, I was overcome with emotions but knew I had to do it for our troops. After just a few
weeks on the ground I can honestly say we are doing it not just for our troops but also for the
great people of Iraq who desperately want to regain control of their country and build a proud
and free society.
(U//FOUO) I've had the opportunity to travel out into the IZ (international (green) zone) several
times now, and I have to say that it is very encouraging to work with the locals and hear how
thankful they are for our support and efforts. I have met businessmen who are putting their
efforts toward rebuilding infrastructure and are excited every time there is a tenth of an hour of
increased electricity available everyday. I have met Iraqis shoveling sand into sand bags to
protect our living areas or cooking our meals who are educated as lawyers and accountants,
anxious to get back to work but willing to do whatever it takes until that day comes.
(U//FOUO) These are people who every day have their lives and those of their families
threatened because they are working for or with "the infidels." I still find it VERY disconcerting
to enter areas with them and wait while they are all but strip searched. Meanwhile, we are
standing there with body armor and fully loaded weapons, free to roam. It takes them from 1-3
hours just to get into the zone and then they go through multiple searches, even when escorted,
at every internal checkpoint. Kind of uncomfortable for me, but they are so very gracious and
say, "It is for your safety and ours."
(S//SI) As we drive through the streets, I see the bombed out hulks of Iraqi police stations and
security force vehicles. These are the Iraqis who are willing to put their lives on the line daily to
help their own countrymen. The same is true for those serving with the Iraqi National
Intelligence Service SIGINT element who are at great risk every day as they go to work, putting
out solid, valuable, actionable SIGINT that is saving innocent lives daily.
(S//SI) On Christmas Eve a small group of folks went out to the military hospital to sing carols
and spend some time with our recovering soldiers. One of our guys was in a Santa suit. They
had Iraqis -- adults and children -- coming up to them on the streets begging to have their
pictures taken with Santa. They were repeatedly wishing our folks a very Merry Christmas and
thanking them for being here. That is the kind of thing you won't see on CNN and yet that
display of gratitude goes on every single day. On Christmas Day the head of the Iraqi SIGINT
Element told some of our folks, "We are all working together for a common cause: the
destruction of Global Terrorism. I am grateful you gave up Christmas with your family to make
Iraq a free and democratic country."
(U//FOUO) It is now clear to me that the job we are doing is not to save the face of the US but
to help our decision- and policy-makers do the right things for this potentially great nation of
Iraq while protecting our own people and those Iraqis who are willing to give their lives to build
a better nation. Our target is a subset of this population who are taking advantage and hiding
amongst some really good people. Many are willing to expose them, many fear for their lives.
(S) Between some incredible SIGINT and an improving HUMINT effort, I believe we are getting

 ahead. It is hard to judge how good of a job we are doing but I have to believe we are making a
difference. I don't know that we will ever put a lid on it, but if we give the Iraqis a chance they
may be able to bring some order into play. That is why we are here -- so we can get out of here
and leave them with the potential for a happy, healthy, safe and prosperous future!

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 