DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Seven Minutes
FROM: Wayne Murphy
SID Keyworker for the CFC
Run Date: 11/01/2005

As the SID Keyworker for the Combined Federal Campaign (CFC) I've received a number of
contacts from personnel with questions about the CFC. Last week I got an e-mail from an
employee asking what they needed to do in order to make a contribution. I spend about 2
minutes writing back to thank them for their interest, and explained all the giving options. They
wrote back within 7 minutes of getting my e-mail to say they had just completed making their
donation. Seven minutes!
I don't know whom he chose to donate to or how much he chose to give, but I know that in that
7 minutes his actions may have changed the life of a stranger or strangers who will anonymously
benefit from the fruits of his generosity. OK, that may be a little melodramatic, but look at the
tiny acts of kindness that have made such a difference in places like the Gulf Coast, in the
earthquake wracked parts of South Asia or in the desperately impoverished parts of Africa. How
much time or money is a meal, a blanket, a bandage, a teddy bear for a child, or a warm bed
worth? Couldn't any of those simple acts change a life?
Most of us lead very busy lives and have a great many demands placed on us. People who work
the vital mission of the Signals Intelligence Directorate are especially representative of placing
others before self in devoted service to their country. Many of you give generously and prefer to
give anonymously outside of work to causes that matter to you and those you love. I'm asking if
you won't extend yourself a bit more and consider how you might best spend 7 minutes of your
day today.
Take the time you might spend in a Starbuck's line this week and the money you might spend
on a week's worth of their coffee and change the life of a stranger. You give 100% to mission
every day, wouldn't it be great if the SID CFC could reflect 100% participation in the charitable
cause of others. Thank you for considering this request.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 