DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) SID Diversity Status Report
FROM: MG Richard Quirk, USA
SIGINT Director
Run Date: 04/21/2005

(U) Over the past year, the SID Leadership team has led a number of ongoing activities relating
to SID diversity. This subject is very important to SID leadership; a significant amount of our
time has been devoted to diversity discussions and planning. I'll update you on what has gone
on so far.
(U) We continue to engage the SID workforce through a series of diversity town meetings with a
number of affinity groups. I have found these town meetings to be very enlightening as many of
you have shared your concerns and suggestions on a way forward with me and the SID
leadership. We still have two more town meetings to schedule, then I plan to hold regular
sessions with focus groups to ensure that the organization is attuned to the ideas and concerns
of the workforce.
(U) In addition, SID management is mindful of its responsibility for a fair and equal rewards
(promotion and awards) process. We are implementing a pre-decisional review of the 2005
rewards to allow SID leadership an opportunity to immediately assess and discuss the
organization's fairness. We are fully committed to an equal and fair process to recognize the
performance of SID employees, as we directed in the 2005 Promotion Program Strategic
Guidance . We plan to continue these assessments for succeeding promotion/awards cycles, and
major career advancement decisions.
(U//FOUO) To assist Dr. Reinsfelder in managing SID's diversity activities, I have assigned a
permanent staff officer, 
 who will work to harness the ideas and issues of both the
workforce and the leadership, to use the ideas and best practices of diversity professionals to
coordinate the diversity effort here in SID. Each Deputy Directorate has assigned senior
personnel to be responsible for their diversity activities contributing to the greater SID effort.
More staff will be considered if the mission of SID diversity so warrants.
(U) In addition, we have begun to draft a SID Diversity Concept of Operations (CONOP) and a
strategy for SID hiring for 2006. The CONOP is intended to define, then codify, diversity goals
and issues within SID and will also describe the activities, roles, responsibilities, and interactions
for leading and managing the effort within the organization. The SID 2006 hiring program
ensures that, like the rewards process, SID's hiring will be fair and equitable, and serve to
provide the diversity that's so critical for SID's workforce.
(U) SID has engaged the Agency's EEO and Diversity organizations and the Director of Central
Intelligence's (DCI's) Diversity Senior Advisory Panel to the Intelligence Community (DSAPIC)
for guidance to inform our effort. SID representatives attended the 2005 Diversity Summit East
to learn best practices in diversity related leadership, management strategies, workforce
engagement, and human capital development.
(U) As you can see, there is a lot going on in SID to promote diversity. Please continue to look
to SID's Diversity Home Page for the latest news-- we are working hard to make the web site a
good place to go for developments and information.
(U) I have said many times that "taking care of people" is a top priority. Completing that mission
requires that we understand and value diversity. The SID Leadership Team will continue to work
at this issue until we are satisfied that we have done all we can to ensure that the entire
organization values diversity and operates with fairness.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet

 without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 