DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Re-Invigorating the Collection Association
FROM: 
Collection Association awards poc
Run Date: 08/30/2005

(U) This concludes the "Learned Orgs 2005" series...
(U//FOUO) The NSA Collection Association (CA) has not ridden off
into the sunset, as some believe, but is still kicking and breathing,
although it is labored breathing. The CA has been around for over
27 years, serving NSA collection and associated interests by
providing Community-wide recognition and unique opportunities for
professional growth. It is not ready to give up the fight.
(U//FOUO) Through the years, the CA membership has played a
key role in the many successes of many NSA employees at one
point or another in their career. They tend to care strongly about
the collection field and work everyday to continue to learn,
improve, research, manage, and understand the changing signals
environment. They also work to pass on to the next generation the
knowledge that only comes from years of experience, to assist the
future collectors in upholding the high standards of the collection
field.
(U//FOUO) Although the CA may not be as large as it was in the
past, it still has members willing to put in the extra effort to
maintain the many awards created to recognize collectors
developed by the CA membership. This year with the assistance of
the Director of the Professional Health Program Skill Community
for Collection , and some die-hard CA members, as well as others,
the CA has been able to continue with the awards created to honor
those individuals the CA considers the backbone of the SIGINT
community.
(U//FOUO) Recently the "Call for Nominations" announcements
were sent out via Agency-all and the Automated Messages
Handling System (AMHS) for the following CA awards:
(U) 2004 Ardisana Collector of the Year
(U) 2004 Mooney Collection Manager of the Year
(U) 2004 Hunt Technical Literature Award
(U) 2004 Szymanowski Team Award
(U//FOUO) All have the submission deadlines of 31 August 2005.
The chairperson for each of these awards are listed in the in the
"Call for Nominations" announcements provided above. More
information on the awards and previous winners is located on
Collection Association Award web pages .
(U//FOUO) During its existence, the CA has recognized many
individuals with these yearly awards. These awards were
established not only to recognize outstanding collectors and
collection managers yearly, but also to honor those individuals

 SERIES: 
(U) SID and Congress
1.  SID's Interactions
with Congress:
Setting the Budget
2.  SID's Interactions
with Congress:
Budget Jargon and
RFIs
3.  SID's Interactions
with Congress:
Communications and
Orgs
4.  Re-Invigorating the
Collection
Association

 whose names identify the awards and who played an integral role
in the collection community, and the CA. For further information on
the CA and how to become a member, check out the CA web page
.
(U) We're working hard to breathe renewed life into the Collection
Association -- we'd love to have you join us!

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 