DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) SID's Senior Enlisted Leader
FROM: MG Richard J. Quirk, USA
Signals Intelligence Director
Run Date: 01/05/2005

(U//FOUO) The Director recently announced the appointment of Chief Master 
 as the new NSA/CSS Senior Enlisted Advisor (SEA). (See DIRgram-371: "NSA/CSS
Senior Enlisted Advisor" .) Because our military workforce is so important to the success of our
SIGINT mission, I'd like to re-introduce
 the SID Senior Enlisted Leader
(SEL), who is the SID liaison between the DIRNSA Senior Enlisted Advisor, Central Security
Service Office and Service Cryptologic Organizations/Elements at NSAW.
(U//FOUO)
has been in the SIGINT Directorate for over a year. I have placed many
responsibilities on him -- he wears several hats and fulfills many necessary functions with regard
to the SID military workforce. He advises me and other SIGINT leaders concerning the effective
operation of the SIGINT system; I rely on him to know inside and out what we do and how we do
it. 
 also serves as the internal assignment manager for military personnel within
SID. He advocates for military personnel and helps to shape policy on issues that affect the
military workforce and mission. He keeps the lines of communication open between me and the
military workforce and the civilian workforce who serve with them.
(U//FOUO) Over the past year,
initiatives within the SIGINT Directorate:

has been the driving force behind many important

He ensured that 100% of the military billets in SID were justified for the recent DOD
Validation & Assessment Board.
He saw the need to improve officer placement within SID, and he has delegated
placement authority to three senior officer representatives at the O-6 level. This process
ensures that all officers and warrant officers in our organization receive the guidance and
career advice necessary when taking on a mission here at NSA.
He restructured the enlisted skills shop and the manner in which enlisted service
members are placed within SID, using requirements, priorities, and job descriptions as
guidelines.
He also changed the responsibilities of Senior Enlisted Advisor (now Leader) and Senior
Enlisted Representatives. Senior Enlisted Leaders bring more than 20 years of experience
management, operations and leadership. These Senior Enlisted Leaders will be used in
operational rather than administrative areas. Senior Enlisted Representatives are
responsible for training, awards, evaluations and counseling.
(U//FOUO)
 commitment to appropriately recognizing our military workforce has
brought about an improved system for tracking the awards process that alerts management
when an individual is in the eligibility window. We all know how important this sort of recognition
is, and 
 process ensures that each member gets fair and equal consideration no
matter what level the award, and that awards get to those who deserve them regardless of rank.
(U//FOUO) There's plenty more to do to ensure that SID is providing the best possible career
opportunities to our military workforce and to guarantee that our military members are
providing the best possible support to this Agency's SIGINT mission. If you're a manager or
technical leader, you can make
 job easier by helping him to understand what our
military personnel are doing (and could do) in their positions and providing him insight into
mission requirements, job descriptions, and other management information that will facilitate his
work. For him to fulfill his responsibilities to me and to SID senior leadership, he needs access
to all areas and information throughout the SIGINT Directorate. I ask you to play your part in
providing
the right tools and information to do the important work I've entrusted to

 him.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 