DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Stress Doesn't Live Here
FROM: 
NSA integrees at GCHQ
Run Date: 02/18/2005

NSA'ers working as integrees at the UK's Government
Communications Headquarters find the lifestyle "jolly good" (U)
(U) Did you know that jobs advertised in Cheltenham, England
have more applicants per position than any other PCS location? It's
not hard to understand why. You live and work in the Cotswolds -an officially designated "area of outstanding natural beauty" -- in a
country steeped in history and tradition and with whom we share a
common language (well, mostly) and set of values.
(U) Many Americans choose to live in "town" for any number of
reasons. The "townies" benefit from the convenience of being close
to work as well as living in a vibrant city with theater, arts, festivals
and shops. Despite its modernity, making your way around
Cheltenham can also have the feel of stepping back in time as you
pass stately old homes and the not-uncommon lady cyclist in her
skirt and loafers pedalling an old-style bike with a basket on front.
(U) But we longed for a different experience. We wanted to live in
a small village in the countryside. Our village of Temple Guiting is
only 17 miles from Cheltenham and the "townies", but a world
away in other respects. It is nearly impossible to hold on to any
feelings of stress as we drive to and from work each day along
winding country lanes. Vistas spanning miles of green fields and
rolling hills dotted with sheep open before us. Rabbits and
pheasants play in among the hedgerows, and we travel through
other villages where the houses and quaint cottages are made of
the warm, honey-colored Cotswold stone that is the trademark of
this area.
(U) Village life is full of simple pleasures. We can "ramble" around
on any number of pre-mapped-out walks through the countryside,
perhaps go along to watch a fox hunt meeting up nearby, or attend
"movie night" in the village hall where they show first-run movies
at half the cinema price and you can bring your own popcorn and
wine. On Sundays, we might walk down to the village store and
pick up a newspaper and some fresh pastries. And our landlord's
father, who raises a few chickens in his retirement, knocks on our
kitchen window every Saturday with a half-dozen fresh eggs and
sometimes a warm raspberry crumble.

(U) If we're looking for something to do on one of our ten-plus long
holiday weekends during the year (thanks to the addition of British
bank holidays), it is easy to plan a short break to the mountains of
northern Wales, the lakes of the Lake District, the beaches and
coastlines of Cornwall, or the numerous historic castles and
cathedrals.

 SERIES: 
(U) SID Around the
World '05
1.  Paradise Found
2.  A Very Southern City
3.  Stress Doesn't Live
Here
4.  Remember the
Alamo!
5.  The 'Other' End-toEnd SIGINT Site in
the UK
6.  Letter from Oz

 (U) So, whether you choose to be a Cheltenham "townie" or
country squires like us, you'll find that stress just doesn't live here.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 