DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Monthly Update: What's Happening in the Customer Relationships
Directorate
FROM: Charles Berlin
SID/Deputy Director for Customer Relationships (S1)
Run Date: 08/03/2005

(U) The monthly wrap-up from CRD...
Senior Leadership Activities
(U//FOUO) Not long ago I held the first of what I envision as a series of regularly scheduled town
meetings to keep the CRD workforce up to date on the changes being considered, underway and
those recently accomplished.
(U//FOUO) CRD helps deliver the right information in the right format to the right customers to
safeguard our nation's security. In the future we will employ a global network of "hubs," focused
on our customer relationships in a particular region, carrying out operations wherever it makes
the most sense. We are hosting the heads of the S1 hubs from Denver, Georgia, Hawaii and
Texas on 3 & 4 August for deeper discussions about functions, structure and governance.
(U//FOUO) This new positioning of our resources means we must gain an even deeper
understanding of each customer's mission, key decision points, priorities, information needs and
opportunities, so that we can get them the information they need to do their jobs better.
Operations
(U//FOUO) Military Integration (formerly S13) became part of the National Tactical
Integration Office (S14) organization. The new NTIO is restructuring to become a military
requirements analysis and facilitation organization. It will work to more fully integrate NSA/CSS
with the warfighter and help integrate advanced technology into tactical cryptologic systems.
(U//FOUO) This newly formed organization will have strong partnerships across NSA, with the
U.S. military and the Service Cryptologic Elements (SCEs). These connections will help us
maximize relationships with foreign partner SIGINT services and their respective defense
elements. In addition, we aim to develop an end-to-end partnership with the military and SCEs - NSA can contribute to areas such as training and exercises for the future tactical force. As we
merge our functions and shift responsibilities, we will ensure that support currently being
provided will continue at the same levels.
(S//SI) In response to the recent London bombings, Information Sharing Services (S12) has
been working even more closely with their GCHQ* counterparts to ensure the timeliest possible
sharing of bomb-related information. In addition, NSA has allowed GCHQ to make
extraordinary use of certain DNI information from NSA reports that will enhance the UK's ability
to investigate the 7 and 21 July bombings.
Personnel Moves
(U//FOUO)
 , CRD Technical Director, is serving as Acting Assistant Deputy Director
for Customer Relationships.
Thomas J. Byczkowski , Deputy Chief of Staff, is serving as Acting Chief of S11
(Information Gateway) while the hiring process for both the chief and deputy positions
proceeds.
 , II moved from chief of S13 to chief of the newly formed
S14, while the former chief of S14, 
 , moved to Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence -- USD(I).

 Margaret Maxson , Deputy Chief of S13, was selected for a National Security Fellowship
at Harvard University, a year-long course of study beginning in August.
*(U) Note: 
GCHQ = the UK's Government Communications HQ

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 