DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) More on the S2 Redesign
FROM: Carl Johnson
SID/Deputy Director for Analysis & Production (S2)
Run Date: 05/24/2005

Last week, MG Quirk announced the redesign of S2 (see article ). Here are the latest
developments... (U//FOUO)
(U//FOUO) The redesign of the Analysis and Production Directorate is progressing at pace, and
with the announcement of the S2 leadership team , we are well on our way towards
implementation of this exciting plan. The new framework will not only optimize A&P's existing
strengths, but it will also provide the necessary construct to enable the A&P workforce to
operate in a seamless, global, net-centric environment. This is not about "boxology", but rather
about positioning the A&P workforce to play their positions as the Agency continues to
transform, moving towards expeditionary cryptology while we support current and emerging
threats. We are positioning ourselves to win, and the A&P redesign is the next step in our
strategy. A visual depiction of the redesign is also available.
(U//FOUO) The new positions introduced in the redesign will address the strategic, capabilitiesbased, end-to-end responsibilities required in this net-centric environment. They will enable
more efficient communications and decision-making, and will also provide the flexibility we need
to respond in this rapidly changing environment.
The S2 Chief of Staff will have broad responsibilities for corporate and operations staff
functions with shared oversight of budget, plans, programs, architecture and
requirements for systems and tools that enhance analysis and production across the
extended NSA/CSS enterprise.
The S2 Group Chiefs will have broad responsibilities for strategic and global initiatives,
with the focus on transformation, integration, knowledge management and interface with
enablers across the cryptologic enterprise.
The Global Capabilities Managers (GCM) are charged with end-to-end operations of
the Product Line, to include assigning mission responsibilities to production centers, and
working with the Cryptologic Center Chiefs in Denver, Georgia, Hawaii and Texas to align
resources, maintain capabilities, and optimize production across national and tactical
missions.
Managing the largest Production Center is the responsibility of the Primary Production
Center Managers (PPCM).
The Production Center Leads have the charge to manage day-to-day operations at a
Production Center.
Finally, all PPCMs and Production Center Leads will work with the GCMs to coordinate and
optimize worldwide production and current operations.
(U//FOUO) The two transition teams I commissioned several weeks ago have been engaged in
developing a framework for the transition plan, with much focus to date on identifying the
decisions that need to be made and determining at what level they should be made. The teams,
which include membership from each of the Cryptologic Centers, are developing a workforce
engagement strategy, which will be announced within the next week.
(U//FOUO) We recognize that the S2 workforce has much to offer as we progress through the
transition, and we want to capitalize as much as possible on the experiences and expertise of the
workforce as we develop the transition strategy. Please be receptive to opportunities to
participate in this process -- your input is vital to our success. There is a Transition Team link
from the S2 Homepage, and I encourage you to visit the website (
) to learn about the most current

 activities of the teams.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 