DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) MGQ's Notes from the Field - Part 1
FROM: MG Richard Quirk
SIGINT Director
Run Date: 04/01/2005

Over the next twelve days, a good-sized team from the SIGINT
Leadership will be touring the CENTCOM area, looking in on our
customers, partners, and deployed cryptologic teammates to learn
how we are doing and how we can improve. We plan to keep you
informed through SID today . I hope you enjoy the notes and
articles.(S)
(S) I'm very happy to be writing you tonight from the "Water
Palace" in Baghdad. This has been an impressive day. Its most
gratifying aspect has been the chance to talk to, and listen to, the
SIGINTers and Information Assurance Personnel who are forwardbased in Qatar and Iraq. They are very excited about the positive
contribution that they are able to make over here.
(S) Poised at the intersection between the Cryptologic Community
and our warfighting customers, they keenly sense the value of their
work in a way that is sometimes difficult back home. They are
learning a great deal that they know will make them better
intelligence professionals. Meanwhile, they are rewarded each and
every day when their customers take their advice and run
operations based upon it. As they participate in operations with a
wide range of appreciative partners, they are building experiences
and memories that they will treasure for the rest of their lives.
They are a valued part of this combat team, and they have a lot to
be proud of. It is so great for me to hear them praise the other
members of the global Cryptologic Team as they modestly give the
credit to those of us who serve elsewhere in the SIGINT System.
(U//FOUO) From this vantage, I can see the evolution of the US
SIGINT System into "one single, global, integrated, self-aware,
self-synchronizing system", as Lt Gen Hayden likes to describe it.
We are all making good progress toward this network-centric
model because of your brilliant work and theirs as well.
(U) Our Transformation is coming about amidst major changes
across all military and civilian efforts. It is clear in the way we are
engaging this new kind of enemy. Our performance makes me
proud, enthusiastic, and confident in the future.
(S) We are witnessing the emergence of a new kind of SIGINT
enterprise. The transformation is real and it's happening here in
Iraq (and elsewhere in the SIGINT enterprise)! Of course, it's still a
work in progress, but on our best days (and there are more great
days than bad), we are truly working as a single team. It's really
exciting to see the impacts this new approach is having on how
and what we are delivering to the nation!
(U) It is a different kind of military and civilian leadership and a
different kind of troop (civilian and military as well) that is
advancing democracy in Iraq today. It's far more agile, thinks

 SERIES: 
(U) SID Leadership '05
TDY to CENTCOM AOR
1.  MGQ's Notes from
the Field - Part 1
2.  Field Station Rattler
3.  Hello from Iraq!
4.  MG Q Iraq Theater
TDY: Day 3, April1,
2005
5.  The Art of Sharing:
Insight and
Continuity
6.  MGQ's Notes from
the Field - Part 2
7.  MGQ's Notes from
the Field - Part 3
8.  Summing Up the Trip
9.  The Trip in Photos
10.  Seeing into the
Global SIGINT
System - A View
from the Field

 more broadly, and is far more integrated than the world has ever
seen before! It's also driven by a new kind of
intelligence...intelligence that is no longer simply about answering
one-off customer intelligence needs, but is instead about driving
the mission with insight and actionable information that leads
directly to decisions, options, and outcomes at every level of the
effort. This is what has me so excited!
(U) My thanks to all of you for all that you are doing for our nation,
and especially in the Global War on Terrorism. To all members of
the US Cryptologic System, keep up your great work!
(U) Over the next days, I will try to send you updates on specific
points of interest from the trip. Other members of the team may
also send articles.
(U) Tonight, as a first installment, I am including a short article*
that I asked 
 to write from his current job as MENA
analyst on the Baghdad CSG. He is a true star out here, not only
because of the products he has personally produced, but also
because of the professional training he has provided to so many
SIGINT analysts deployed over here.
MG Q

SID today .

 article is in the second position in today's edition of

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 