DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Attend the Speech about 'Innovation on Demand'
FROM:
Secretary, Science & Engineering Society
Run Date: 11/15/2005

(U//FOUO) The Science & Engineering Society presents Mr. David Haygood, IDEO Corporation
speaking on "Innovation on Demand":
Date: Thursday, 17 November 2005 
Time: 10:00 am - 11:00 am 
Place: R&E Symposium Center
(U) You've been there before. You've slaved over a project where you thought you understood
what the user wanted, only to be let down when you delivered your product. The user just didn't
"get it." How can you be expected to create anything useful if the users don't have a clue what
they want? Or maybe, you're the user who's been burned too many times trying to tell someone
what you needed, but they just didn't "get it." They built what they thought you said, not what
you meant.
(U) "User Centered Design" is an approach to innovation and the culture that fuels it. It is a way
of achieving a deeper understanding of users' needs that go well beyond normal requirementsgathering. Mr. Haywood's company, IDEO, has been successful in applying this concept to the
development of the first Apple mouse, the first laptop computer, the Palm V, and the LifePort
Kidney Transporter. They have demonstrated their process in over 3500 projects in fields as
diverse as software interaction design, the development of new services, spaces and
experiences, and even the transformation of innovation culture in large corporations. One
example is creating Dilbert's Ultimate Cubicle.
(U) David Haygood has an MS in Engineering from Stanford. He fulfills the ideal "T-shaped"
background IDEO looks for in their designers - broad experience in a number of fields, and deep
experience in one or two. His depth of business and technical management roles is balanced by
his broad experience in taking a diverse range of products and services from concept to market.
He has been an Army combat photographer in Vietnam, a leader of chapel services in a
maximum security prison, and and he has swum from Alcatraz to San Francisco in a triathlon, all
of which provides fodder for innovative thinking.
(U//FOUO) This presentation is unclassified and is open to all. It will be broadcast on
Newsmagazine and videotaped.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 