DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Paradise Found
FROM: 
Chief J304, Analysis & Reporting Staff, Kunia RSOC
Run Date: 01/28/2005

Wintertime on Oahu, home to the Kunia Regional Security
Operations Center... (U)
(U) Brrrrr. It was a cold, winter day in the islands. I had to put the
heat on in the car -- the temperature was only 68! I was a little
late getting out this morning. The neighborhood peacocks were
standing at the edge of my driveway and did not want to move.
Must be mating season since the male was proudly displaying his
feathers. Since I was running late anyway, I decided to take the
long way in. There's a swell on the North Shore and the waves
were cresting at 20-30 ft. It's quite a sight. I sipped my Kona
blend coffee as I meandered on the winding, seaside road, taking
in the great white splashes as the waves hit the beach...
(U) Though most KRSOCers live near the facility, I live on the
windward side of the island. It's a long drive by Hawaii standards
(about 30 miles), but everyday when I come home I get a
spectacular view of the crystal blue water when I cross the Koolau
Mountains. Our house sits at the base of the mountains and when
it rains, there are about 16 waterfalls we can view out our back
window. If I want to see a waterfall when it's not raining, I just go
down a few streets and hike back a short path, which leads me to
an always-running waterfall.
(U) I know what you're thinking. It sounds too good to be true.
There's got to be a catch. Well, yes. When it gets down to 70, I
have to wear pants because its too cold for shorts. Sure, I'm far
away from my family, but you would be amazed at how many
relatives come out of the woodwork when they find out you live in
Hawaii. I think I've seen more of them living here than when I lived
back east! You've probably heard that housing prices are high.
From what I've seen back at the Fort, they're just as high back
there if not higher. And out here, I'm living on a 25% COLA, plus
I'm on the Pacific pay scale, which has a 13% higher base than the
regular GS pay scale. Hawaii has all the big discount places -WalMart, Costco, Sam's Club -- and the local supermarkets are
always running sales.
(U) Is there such a thing as island fever? I don't think so. While I
may be sitting out in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, Hawaii is
made up of several islands and each one is different. Did you know
you can ski in Hawaii? The Big Island's two peaks, Mauna Kea and
Mauna Loa, see snow every winter and many people hop over to
the island for a quick ski trip. Don't ski? Well, landlubbers can find
a golf course within probably a 5- or 10-minute drive no matter
where they live. And for those lazy weekend days, just pack up the
grill and make a day of it on the beach. The state's beach parks all
have restrooms and showers, ample parking, and lifeguards to
keep everyone safe. Oh, and NSAers have the annual Thanksgiving
on the Beach. Where else in the world can you do that?

 SERIES: 
(U) SID Around the
World '05
1.  Paradise Found
2.  A Very Southern City
3.  Stress Doesn't Live
Here
4.  Remember the
Alamo!
5.  The 'Other' End-toEnd SIGINT Site in
the UK
6.  Letter from Oz

 (U) Well, I hope I've provided you with a little piece of my paradise
found. I think I'll go wander down to Waikiki, have a mai tai on the
beach, and wait for the green flash when the sun sets over the
water. I may just catch a glimpse of the whales breeching since its
whale season right now. Aloha!

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 