DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) The Medium is the Message (With Apologies to Marshall McLuhan)
FROM: Information-Sharing Services (S12, the former Customer Response)
and Proliferation and Arms Control (PAC, S2G)
Unknown
Run Date: 03/16/2005

The Latest Stage in the Evolution of Database Reporting (U)
(S//SI) Last October, the Analysis & Production Operations Staff told you about the Database
Reporting Initiative ( "Making SIGINT Sharable -- The Database Is the Report" ). Now this
initiative has progressed a step further: we are pleased to announce that advanced SIGINT
database reports -- serialized, searchable, relational, and password-protected -- have now been
published on Intelink and the Second Party Mall. These database reports are available at
access requires an account, and
the site includes an account application). External customers were briefed about this new
capability starting in mid-March, and initial reaction has been very positive. This initiative
supports DIRNSA's instruction to the workforce, expressed in "Cryptology as a Team Sport" to
"live in [our customers'] information space in order to engage them at the earliest possible
stages in our respective processes." (See reference ).
(S//SI) These reports, on the topic of Iranian nuclear procurement, are being published by the
Office of Proliferation and Arms Control's Nuclear Branch (S2G11), the CBW and CBRN**
Terrorism Branch (S2G13), and the Publication Development Branch's EPIC** team (S1231).
The three offices and their parent organizations worked long and hard to ensure that all
reporting requirements for accountability and tracking of source data were met. S2G11 and
S2G13 issued a Precis, standard procedure for such reporting vehicles as Hardcopy and
Multimedia reports , electronically notifying customers where the actual "reports" are available
and acting as placeholders in the ANCHORY product report database.
About Iranian Nuclear Procurement Reporting... (TS//SI)
(TS//SI) With the support of Operation SIGINT, the Iranian Nuclear Procurement database
reporting initiative has made it possible to publish large volumes of easily formatted data
("structured content") quickly and efficiently. This database reporting supplements (rather than
replaces) current SIGINT reporting on these targets -- customers now have greater access to
valuable SIGINT information than ever before.
(TS//SI) So far, the data include categories for: procurement, organizations, people, account
numbers, shipping information, conferences, and papers. S2G13 currently has a data set
available only for CBW, but an additional data set for CBRN is expected this year. A requirement
for a PAC High-Interest Cargoes (HIC) database has also been established.
Post-Publication Requests? (U)
(U) Customers can submit post-publication requests, to include sanitization requests, by using
the database serial number and the record identification number. At the start of each new year,
the database name will remain the same, but will be assigned a new annual serial number
reflecting the date change.
Questions? (U)
(U) A Database Reporting FAQ is available on EPIC's "Structured SIGINT Sharing Space ("go
4s") webpage; it lists the many benefits of this extension of delivery services. S2G1 would
appreciate knowing what users think of this new capability, and the EPIC team is eager to find
and address problem areas and help develop standards for storing and presenting data, so that
this concept can be applied to other data sources.

 (U) Both the target offices and the database developers encourage feedback via the SIGINT
Database Reporting feedback option (on Intelink:
 and S2G1 analysts are willing to host
demos for interested workcenters. The RebA (Rebuilding Analysis) Program Office is making
funds available to support this venture. We urge other target offices to consider taking
advantage of this opportunity to optimize customer access by contacting the EPIC team at
 or via e-mail at 
.
**(U) Footnotes: 
CBW = Chemical and Biological Weapons 
CBRN = Chemical/Biological/ Radiological/Nuclear 
EPIC = Enterprise Prototypes for Intelligence Customers

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 