DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) A Different Kind of 'Campaign Update'
FROM: Charlie Meals
SIGINT Deputy Director
Run Date: 10/20/2005

SID's reputation for generosity through the Combined Federal Campaign is reflected in the
strong start since the campaign kicked off on 5 October. I'm proud to be part of an organization
that has such a tremendous capacity for giving--both to mission and to the needs of the
community. I think that has always been one of the real treasures of working at NSA, knowing
that you're a part of so many important dimensions of what makes America great. We are an
agency that gives as much outside of the office as we do inside.
When I went online to make my own choices I was struck by the range and diversity of giving
options that seem to grow with every passing year. Whatever your interest might be it seems
that there is an opportunity to express yourself through the CFC. As I reviewed the choices I
thought about the stark needs of so many Americans in the Gulf Coast states; I thought about
the increased demands on organizations that support our service men and women and their
families; I thought about the medical and family care programs that touch the lives of so many
of us; I thought about social issues about which I care deeply; and I thought about enrichment
programs that I have enjoyed with my family over the past year. None of these activities can be
successful without commitment and support through fundraisers like the Combined Federal
Campaign. I take pleasure in knowing that I'm making a difference where I can; and that when
or if I have to avail myself of some service I'll know that I've contributed to their ability to
succeed.
If you've never given through the Combined Federal Campaign, or if your giving has fallen off in
recent years, I encourage you to make a list of things that matter in your life and spend a
moment looking at the options to say "thanks" to organizations and activities that are making a
difference for you.
To paraphrase the CFC slogan, "Every one of you counts" in making our nation more secure and
"every one of your donations" -- big or small -- counts in strengthening the fabric of the society
you serve and protect.
Thank you for taking the time to consider your role in this year's Combined Federal Campaign.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 