DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) There is a New DDCR
FROM: Charles H. Berlin, III
Deputy Director for Customer Relationships
Run Date: 06/15/2005

The following is directed to the Customer Relationships Directorate and holds items of interest to
all of SID.(U)
Good Morning CRD!
(U//FOUO) As you know by now, 
is transitioning to her new position as D/SUSLOL.
As she leaves us, I would like to thank her for her leadership and for the transformational
initiatives she has championed. She has put CRD on the right path and we'll continue along that
course.
(S//SI) I'm looking forward to my new role as the DDCR. I appreciate your dedication and all of
your hard work. It seems we have been going 100 MPH these last months as we support the
Global War on Terrorism in Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan. Keeping our colleagues and
countrymen in harms way always in the forefront of our minds is a motivator. We have some
exciting opportunities ahead of us as well.
(S//SI) You may have heard me talk about "CR Nation." I coined this term to talk about how we,
in CR, operate on a global basis. Our mission is vitally important. In fact, the first word of the
first goal of NSA's strategic plan is the word deliver. We are responsible for ensuring that the
right information is delivered to the right person at the right time. It will take a global team to
do this and it's important that we move toward a state of transparency through all cryptologic
nodes worldwide. As an integral mission partner, we must remember that, in addition to our
customer-facing mission, we have an inward facing part of CR that passes on the needs to the
rest of the USSS in terms it can understand. Translating customer information needs into
prioritized SIGINT tasks or needs for new capabilities and communicating it to the rest of the
system is just as important. One of our major goals will be to ensure the success of S2 and S3.
(U//FOUO) In addition to our constant mission operations we will continue on the road of
Transformation. Transformation 2.0, where mission blending is one of the six major themes, is
far from done. The goal of mission blending is to leverage our "industrial strength SIGINT and IA
capabilities." This has led to the creation of "centers" such as the NTOC and NCSC. We are
contemplating new centers in the near future. These new centers and our Cryptologic Centers in
Georgia, Texas, Colorado and Hawaii will need our best support and their success represents
another crucial goal for us.
(U) I will be communicating with you often about these and other initiatives. However, I want to
hear from you as well. We'll be scheduling some town meetings in the near future to share
information and to begin this dialogue.
(U) This next year will be one of increased turbulence and uncertainty. A new DIRNSA and the
new DNI will undoubtedly add new challenges to our days. I know you are up to the challenge you have a marvelous record of excellence. Let's see what the future brings!

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

 DERIVED FROM: 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

