DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Letters to the Editor : Dealing With Our SIGINT Customers
FROM: SIGINT Communications
Unknown
Run Date: 03/22/2005

I received several letters regarding the article Thoughts on Dealing With Our SIGINT Customers
-- the editor (U)
From: 

 (

)

Comment: (U) There is more wisdom in this article than many other I've read. 
is spot-on
with his assessment and he has listed several specific actionable goals which will measurably
improve our customer satisfaction. SID leadership should take this for action. This article is also
a great indicator of transformation thru interns (new ideas and perspective).
From: Anonymous
Comment: (U) Excellent insights from an intern. I was quite impressed with the succint
conclusions about the importance of Customer Liaison Officers and the shortcomings of the
SIGINT reporting.
(S) I agree that the actual presentation of the reports would benefit greatly from Information
Mapping and a much broader degree of liberty in presentation in formatting and word
processing. As Ms. Baginski liked to say, "The only way you can tell the difference between
SIGINT in 2005 and SIGINT in 1965 is that we went to upper and lower case sometime in
there."
(U//FOUO) Digital notebooks? Someday... but how about STE secure mobile telephones so we
can reach the customers when they are out of the office? There is existing technology that NSA
could deploy now.
(U) Please pass my praise to this Intern. I am excited to see that someone so thoughtful and
intelligent has joined the Intelligence Analysis career field!
From: Vanessa Antoine 
Comment: (U) This article not only applies to the SIGINT mission, but applies to IAD as well.
From: 

 

)

Comment: (U//FOUO) I think the author makes very valid points which should each be carefully
reviewed by reporting and customer liaison elements at NSA. Having had some considerable
contact with NSA reps in varying capacities over the years, what the author says regarding the
under-appreciation of the role of the customer reps and the long hours they often have to put in
to properly accomplish their mission, the vital role feedback plays -- and the difficultly in
obtaining and archiving it -- in Agency production, and the need to regularly review product
format for easier reading by customers ... all of this rings a strong bell. These are not new to
those engaged in customer support, but I applaud the author for his initiative in seeking out
such an assignment and for his passing along these valid and important observations. I hope
they are read by managers and others who are in positions to act on them.
From: 
Comment: (U//FOUO) Thank you for an interesting article. I work in S112, Customer Account

 Management, on the Law Enforcement/ Homeland Security team. I agree that customer
relations is sometimes seen as not as worthwhile as production, but right now especially it's
absolutely essential. We (NSA) could do a lot more to make the downtown positions more
attractive to our Reps, at least make it possible to accept a position without having to pay for
the privilege of commuting a longer distance, park, work long hours, etc.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 