DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Monthly Update: What's Happening in CRD
FROM:
SID/Deputy Director for Customer Relationships (S1)
Run Date: 04/13/2005

A rundown on recent events in S1 (U)
Senior Leadership Activities
(U//FOUO) Assistant Deputy Director Charles Berlin and I have been on the road visiting our
partners and customers near and far to discuss the Customer Relationships Directorate's (CRD)
role in mission alignment. CRD's job, in a nutshell, is to help deliver the right information in the
right format to the right customers to safeguard our nation's security. How will we do that in
future? Our goal is to create a global network of "hubs," with each focused on our customer
relationships in a particular region. CRD leadership here at Fort Meade will assign
responsibilities within this network, but the actual operations will be carried out wherever it
makes the most sense.
(U//FOUO) The move to a global, netcentric system presents a lot of challenges. We must gain
an even deeper understanding of each customer's mission, key decision points, priorities,
information needs and opportunities, so that we can get them the information they need to do
their jobs better. With that in mind, I visited NSA/CSS Hawaii and Charles visited NSA/CSS
Georgia, Texas and Colorado. During our visits, we discussed the functions and operating
principles for a global Customer Relationships organization.
Operations
(U//FOUO) The Requirements Analysis Center (formerly S16) merged into the Customer
Gateway (S11) organization -- it will now be known as S114 -- creating a more
comprehensive focus on our internal and external customers. By blending these two
organizations, we will be able to better integrate the results of our customer engagement
activities, gain the deep understanding of our customers needs required to help them achieve
their mission success, provide better direction to the SIGINT system on priorities and focus
areas, and evaluate customer satisfaction with SIGINT products and services.
(U//FOUO) Meanwhile, Customer Response (S12) has completed a thorough reengineering
process to align with their future vision and improve service. They have reorganized and
renamed themselves Information-Sharing Services to reflect the Agency transformation
from strictly a product-publishing entity to an information-sharing focus. They will continue to
provide tools, policy and services to enable efficient and effective movement of information to
the customer/partner domain. For details of the changes visit their website at go S12.
(U//FOUO) We are also re-examining how we work across the services to plan and implement a
future global strategy for national-tactical integration. The Military Integration (S13) and
National Tactical Integration Offices (S14) are developing a comprehensive plan to make the
integration of cryptologic forces throughout the world as seamless, routine, and efficient as
possible. A major new role will be to "organize, train and equip" and connect every tactical
SIGINTer with every other SIGINTer in the USSS.
Personnel Moves
(U//FOUO) Dr. Prescott B. Winter has moved from Chief of S12 (Information-Sharing
Services) to Chief of the newly created NSA/CSS Commercial Solutions Center, a blend of SID
and IAD organizations dealing with commercial enterprises. 
comes to us from
S01 where he was Associate Deputy for Integrated Planning to take over as Chief of S12.

 (U//FOUO) 
 has taken over as chief of the Requirements Analysis Cell
(S114). 
 has moved from Acting Chief of the RAC to become Chief of
Staff for the NSA/CSS Senior Language Authority.
This is the first in a series of monthly articles we hope to present from each of the SID Deputy
Directorates (aka "bubbles" -- S1, S2, and S3). They will contain news blurbs to keep everyone
across SID up-to-date on important operational events, personnel moves, management
activites, etc. Let us know what you think of these "bubble wrap-ups" -- The editor (U)

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

 