DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) SID Mailbag: SID and the Open Architecture Design
FROM: SIGINT Communications
Unknown
Run Date: 12/08/2005

(U//FOUO) What do SID analysts really think about the proposed work spaces of the future?
Question: (U//FOUO) For several months, I&L has solicited input from analysts from all walks
of SIGINT for the design of the new facility in Hawaii. Most of the analysts I know are horrified
by the idea of working in spaces as open as the model indicated. Several analysts have
expressed their concerns via the hrsocmodel webpage . There seems to be little indication that
analysts' concerns are being taken into account in this design process.
(U//FOUO) It seems like somebody who knows nothing of intelligence production - especially
language analysis - has been allowed to buy into the film portrayal of NSA and ignore a good
portion of the practical issues which severely affect SIGINT production. How much influence
does SID actually have in determining the kind of work environment for its analysts? Is it
possible for you to provide statistics on the responses and comments from SID analysts so we
can see what sort of response the design concept has received?
Answer: (U//FOUO) SID is heavily involved in the design of the new buildings for the
Cryptologic Centers and has endorsed the open architecture concept because of its flexibility and
enhanced ability for collaboration and teamwork. A SID Design Build Team -- comprising
representatives from S1, S2, S3, SIGDEV, and the extended enterprise (including linguists,
analysts, civilians, and military)-- is working closely with I&L and the design consultants to
ensure the operational spaces, watch areas, and labs in the new buildings provide an optimal
environment for the analysts of the future.
(U) Statistics from the spring timeframe indicate that 75% of respondents to the HRSOC Design
Concept Model Feedback Comment Summary were very supportive of the model's representation
of a modern facility that represents a new way to conduct business. There was very strong
support for the use of natural light and open space to support the collaborative environment that
is shown in the model. 56% of respondents identified visual and audio distractions as a concern
and 44% identified the lack of storage as a concern.
(U) These issues are being worked by the design teams as they progress through the various
design phases for the new buildings. New furniture designs are being evaluated as well as
acoustic materials for walls and ceilings. Noise cancellation headsets are already worn by our
language analysts and will continue to be used in the new buildings. Plants, bookcases, rollaway
whiteboards, and the like will also be part of the new design. These items will be used to
mitigate any visual distractions while maintaining the flexibility needed in the workspace.
(U//FOUO) 
 
Senior Advisor to the DDAP for Mission Alignment 
Mission Alignment and NSA/CSS Build Out PMO 
s

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid_comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

 DERIVED FROM: 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

