DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Letters to the Editor: Still More on Tool Development

FROM: the editor
Unknown

Run Date: 02/03/2006

(U) Some additional thoughts on the "tool development"
discussion...

Comment:

(U) Speaking from an analyst/programmer point of view, there is
no way that you can please all the people all the time. Everybody
has a different job and has different ways to do that job. Anybody
ever heard of the old phrase "If it isn't broke, don't fix it"? How
many people repaint their houses or cars every couple years
because they don't like the way things look? Isn't that what is
going on here?

(U//FOUO) Aren't the majority of the tools being produced today
presentation tools? The more complex the tool, the more
encapusulated the data and the greater chance for data to never
be seen or to contain errors. Give the analysts a set of tools to
view and retrieve their data and provide them with a separate
means to process it. Sure, we have more data to look at
nowadays, and tools like Mainway enable analysts to do jobs they
could never do before. But, what tools are available for the analyst
to actually analyze potentialy reportable data they are seeing on
the screen? Or should they just assume that everything is correct
and all numbers have been normalized correctly? How many
analysts think they could accurately assess/analyze an event with
just one screen full of data? If that could be done, then why don't
we just have a "submit" button?

(U) Instead of investing in different presentation assets, we
should be investing in our analyst assets. Technology will
never be able to replace the analyst, but that seems to be the path
we are going down.

-- Anonymous

a SERIES:

(U) Roadblocks to
Change

1.	Study Points Out
'Roadblocks to

Change'

2.	Letters to the Editor
: About 'Roadblocks

to Change'

3.	Letter to the Editor :
More on Tool

Development

4.	Letter to the Editor :
A Tool Developer's

Perspective on

'Roadblocks to

Change'

5.	Letter to the Editor :
Getting Buy-In for

Tool Development

6.	Letters to the Editor
: Still More on Tool
Development

Comment:

(C) In his Letter to the Editor "Getting Buy-In for Tool
Development",	noted that there was "great resistance" to

the introductionoftheNUCLEON and CREST tools. What he did not
say, however, was that that resistance was prompted by the fact
that the new voice tools, at their introduction, did not work as
advertised. Linguists found that they were much slower than the
previous tools and were plagued by crashes and the inability to do
some tasks that were common with the previous tools. It took a
significant amount of time and effort by our linguists and tech
directors to get the worst of the problems rectified.

(U) The problems were pretty much typical of new tools developed
for this agency. Invariably, the tools are tested on small systems
isolated from the stresses of overloaded networks and large
numbers of users. This is to be expected -- you don't want to test

your new software on a system where the hardware is going to
mask software errors. The problem is that all too many of these
tools are developed without consideration for the difficulties
involved in scaling up from the test system to the actual user
population. As a result, when the tool is introduced, its operation
resembles molasses in January in Juneau. If developers took
more notice of scaling issues, their tools would face less
resistance from the user population.

Comment:

(U//FOUO) So far, all the comments on this topic have been very
good. This is an important issue which is greatly in need of
attention. My comments come from the perspective of providing
tools to the end user (specifically) signal analyst (SA), and as
having spent many years doing survey/collection work as a
"collection engineer." It is my belief that the resistance to change
is linked and exacerbated by the institutions of tool development,
systems deployment, budget and all the other aspects of life in a
large organization. There is no one problem or solution. Below are
some of the issues which I believe affect the adoption of new tools
and technology. Please note that the order of these is random and
does not imply any particular ranking.

(U//FOUO) It is true that many analysts are "institutionally"
resistant to change. However, as a provider of tools, I believe a
greater issue is lack of experience -- and in my experience this
occurs most often with military SAs. Now please, before everyone
gets upset, it is not my intention to imply that military analysts are
any less capable. However, they do face some unique and specific
challenges to becoming truly proficient.

(C) The SA tech schools generally teach very specific tools and
techniques to new SAs before sending them to their first
assignments. What I see in the field, when deploying systems
which may have new tools, is that SOME SAs know the tool and
procedure, and may not always completely understand the theory
of what they are doing. A specific example would be the use of
XAVG and WVT, or XQAM and MERLIN for measuring signal
parameters or demodulation. Both sets of software do essentially
the same task, and it is usually a simple matter of looking where
the appropriate settings are made. I cannot tell how often I have
had to try to explain the theory and issues with frequency
translation and filtering as applied to analog-to-digital conversion
to SAs with years in the field.

(U//FOUO) For the military, this problem is exacerbated by the
way their assignments are handled. Just as they are becoming
proficient, they are PCSed and may need to learn a whole new
target set, and a whole new tool set. I have even seen cases where
a very smart SA was being PCSed to become a truck driver! Also, I
have yet to see a field site with the luxury of enough analysts to do
their jobs, AND provide in-depth training.

(U//FOUO) We also have problems on the developer side, which I
see all too often. Developers of software and systems are often not
users of their own product. An engineer may understand a certain
protocol, but may not understand how the information from that
protocol gets used further down the processing/analysis chain.
Consequently, a very important feature may get buried within their
tool, or not even get implemented. Adding to this, SAs for one
target may need different tool features than SAs for a different

target. This makes it very difficult to make a "one-tool-fits-aN"
software tool.

(U//FOUO) The platform issue further complicates things (PC, DEC,
SUN, etc.) with different tool suites for incompatible platforms
being used by different offices, sites or agencies. Standardization
to a common platform is a great goal, however, you can't force the
implementation of a hardware platform before the software tools
are ready. This only exacerbates the resistance to change. As the
tools merge to a common platform, analysis systems will become
more centralized, and the CCBs (configuration control boards) will
have to become more flexible about allowing the use of additional
tools on their systems - as long as the tool isn't incompatible and
creates problems, and is properly documented and supported. This
is the classic problem of management implementing a good idea
without enough knowledge to think through all the possible
consequences (e.g. the early problems with Beanstalk eating up
valuable CPU time on mission processors).

(U//FOUO) Another of the many platform issues is the language
used to write the new tools. The current platform of choice seems
to be Java, which has many nice features. However, Java
applications do not run well remotely (especially over SSH/SSL),
and more and more we are being asked to remote capabilities. Java
tools need to be written using a client/server approach, and Web
Start. Web Start works quite well, but most systems are not set up
with web servers or Web Start built in. Making this issue worse is
the woeful state of our desktop web browsers. We shouldn't have
to put in remedy tickets to get a browser and Java version which is
compatible with Web Start.

(U//FOUO) As the project office responsible for providing the tools
to the SA, our job is made more difficult by the uncentralized
process of tool development. True, there are tool-depots, and
there is a real need for all the utilities which specific analysts write
for specific functions. However, the greatest need is for a
comprehensive suite of those tools which does not require expert
knowledge.

(U//FOUO) A final institutional problem exists which makes all this
that much more difficult. As a whole, we are exceptionally creative
at working around the problems and shortcomings we face each
day. I believe that in many ways we are our own worst enemies
because we find it easier to go out and create our own local
solution instead of trying to get the bigger problem fixed. We treat
the myriad symptoms which not only leaves precious little time for
treating the disease, but in many ways makes it more difficult for
to find and implement an appropriate solution.

(U//FOUO) I believe that all of these issues contribute to the real
and perceived resistance to change. This is made all the more
difficult by re-orgs, moving funding, etc. (What happens when a
tool development team gets reorganized across fund organizational
fund lines???) This is a large set of problems, with no simple
"one fix” solution.

(U//FOUO) Editor's note: At this point, we'll close out this series.
Thanks to all for sharing their opinions.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108