DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) Come to SID's Identity Intelligence (I2) Day Conference
and See Your Target in a Whole New Light!

FROM: Identity Intelligence Tradecraft Center (I2TC, within S2)

Run Date: 08/12/2010

(S//SI//REL) Are you eager to contribute your expertise,
skills, target knowledge, and analytic tradecraft to
improve SIGINT against our highest priority targets?

Then come to SID's Identity Intelligence Day in the
Friedman Auditorium this September 9th. Chris Inglis, the Deputy Director, will provide
opening remarks and our keynote speaker is VADM (Ret) Mike McConnell (pictured below),
former DIRNSA and former Director of National Intelligence. This is an unprecedented
opportunity to understand how NSA is bringing all its creative energies to bear on tracking an
individual -- and using the power of SIGINT and new research capabilities to understand a
"whole life" approach to a target.

(U//FOUO) What exactly is Identity Intelligence (I2)? It is all about
locating, tracking, and maintaining continuity on individuals across space
and time.* It's not just the traditional communications we're after: it's
taking a "full arsenal" approach that digitally exploits the clues a target
leaves behind in their regular activities on the net to compile biographic and
biometric information that can help the SIGINT system implement precision
targeting. I2 is a crosscutting capability that supports all intelligence
activities. The ability to extract identity attributes of foreign persons-of-
interest from databases across the United States Government -- regardless
of security domain -- is critical to establishing a target's "pattern of life"

(habits, appearance, cyber persona, demeanor, etc).

What's on Tap

(S//SI//REL) This conference will address how today's tools, tradecraft, techniques, and
partnerships are being used to fill in the gaps of our target knowledge. Multiple sources of
identity information are becoming increasingly available: biometrics are improving, biometrics
are being linked to other forms of identifying information, and more biographic information is
now available on networks of interest. These trends create new opportunities for NSA to leverage
its access to a variety of sources and couple it with the creative workforce and powerful analytics
we are known for.

(S//SI//REL) You'll see how NSA fits into a much larger Community effort and the unique,
invaluable contributions we're making every day to help others discover and track their targets.
You'll also learn through case studies and discussions how we rely on our partners for lead work
and the mutually supportive relationships that truly enable operations. We will end the day with
a wrap-up of our current challenges and future direction.

(U/FOUO) With the exception of one joint discussion with US Intelligence Community partners,
the day's offerings are open to all of our cryptologic partners. Contractors may attend with
permission of their COR. Register for I2 Day HERE or check us out on the web for more
information (" go I2DAY ").

DNI McConnell

2 Logo

(U) Notes:

* (U//FOUO) The official definition of I2 is "the collection, analysis, protection, exploitation, and
management of identity attributes and associated technologies and processes in order to locate,
track, and maintain continuity on unattributed identities across multiple or disparate
instances/incidents, or across space and time."

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121 (DL sid comms)."

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108