TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

   

(U) SIGINT Strategy

2012?2016
23 February 2012

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL
(U) Vision

Ensure Signals Intelligence provides THE decisive edge in advancing the full spectrum of U.S. national
security interests.

(U) Mission

Defend the nation through SIGINT-derived advantage with a skilled workforce trained, equipped and
empowered to access and unlock the secrets of our adversaries.

(U) Values

We will constantly strive to improve our knowledge, our people, our technology, and our products.
Through innovation and personalization, we will advance the SIGINT system. Our customers and
stakeholders can rely on us to provide timely, high quality products and services, because we never stop
innovating and improving, and we nevergive up!

(U) The Environment

(U FOUO) For decades, Signals Intelligence has sustained deep and persistent access to all manner of
adversaries to inform and guide the actions and decisions of Presidents, military commanders, policy
makers and clandestine service officers. As the world has changed, and global interdependence and the
advent of the information age have transformed the nature of our target space, we have adapted in
innovative and creative ways that have led some to describe the current day as ?the golden age of


(U FOUO) That reputation was hard-won, but will only endure if we keep sight of the dynamic and
increasingly market driven forces that continue to shape the SIGINT battle space. We must proactively
position ourselves to dominate that environment across discovery, access, exploitation, analysis,
collaboration and in the products and services we provide. The SIGINT system and our interaction
therein must be as agile and dynamic as the information space we confront.

(U FOUO) The mission space for SIGINT in the years ahead will continue to grow at a rapid pace
amidst a dramatically new set of challenges:

(U FOUO) The interpretation and guidelines for applying our authorities, and in some cases the
authorities themselves, have not kept pace with the complexity of the technology and target
environments, or the operational expectations levied on mission.

- (U) Digital information created since 2006 grew tenfold, reaching 1.8 exabytes in 2011, a trend
projected to continue; ubiquitous computing is fundamentally changing how people interact as
individuals become untethered from information sources and their communications tools; and the
traces individuals leave when they interact with the global network will define the capacity to locate,
characterize and understand entitiesl.

 

1 (U) Center for the Study of Intelligence (2010) Where Tomorrow Will Take Us: The New Environment for Intelligence. August 2010

2
TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

- (U) Cyberattacks offer a means for potential adversaries to overcome overwhelming U.S. advantages
in conventional military power and to do so in ways that are instantaneously and exceedingly hard to
trace. Such attacks may not cause the mass casualties of a nuclear strike, but they could paralyze US.
society all the samez.

- (U) The international system as constructed following the Second World War will be almost
unrecognizable by 2025 owing to the rise of emerging powers, a globalizing economy, an historic
transfer of relative wealth and economic power from West to East, and the growing in?uence of
non-state actors3.

(U) Expectations

(U FOUO) The power of information, its short shelf life in the information age and the speed at which
it moves will set the conditions for how NSA interacts with customers. Transactional, passive or linear
relationships will be replaced by embedded, deeply interactive engagements. Existing investments in
cyber security will by necessity expand across the enterprise to meet the demand and speed of action
required to thwart our adversaries. To remain a value for the warfighter our information must be
immediately available at the lowest classification level. The nation will continue to depend upon NSA to
be the lead for the application of the science of sustaining access and understanding of
data even as becomes automatic, transparent and prolific. Products and services from NSA
will evolve into forms and across boundaries that mirror the networked and agile manner in which
people interact in the information age, and we will share information, responsibly and securely, with
external partners and customers.

For SIGINT to be optimally effective, legal, policy, and process authorities must be as
adaptive and dynamic as the technological and operational advances we seek to exploit. Nevertheless,
the culture of compliance, which has allowed the American people to entrust NSA with extraordinary
authorities, will not be compromised in the face of so many demands, even as we aggressively pursue
legal authorities and a policy framework mapped more fully to the information age.

(U FOUO) To sustain current mission relevance and to meet the challenges, the Signals Intelligence
Directorate must undertake a profound and revolutionary shift from the mission approach which has
served us so well in the decades preceding the onset ofthe information age to a SIGINT system that is
as agile and dynamic as the information space we confront. The environment demands it, the capability
of the SIGINT system can achieve it and the work force has the creativity and the skill base to make it
possible.

What follow are the five challenge goals the SIGINT leadership has established to close gaps
between the environment and expectations over the next five years.

 

Lynn, William (2010). Defending a New Domain: The Pentagon?s Cyberstrategy. Foreign Affairs. September/October 2010. Vol
89, No 5, pp 97-108

National Intelligence Council (2010) Global Trends 2020: A Transformed World. United States Government. November 2008

3
TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL
SIGINT Goals for 2012-2016
1. (U FOUO) Revolutionize analysis fundamentally shift our analytic approach from a production to
a discovery bias, enriched by innovative customer/ partner engagement, radically increasing
operational impact across all mission domains.
1.1. (U FOUO) Through advanced tradecraft and automation, dramatically increase mastery of the
global network
1.2. (U FOUO) Conduct original analysis in a collaborative information space that mirrors how people
interact in the information age
1.3. (U FOUO) Disseminate data at its first point of relevance, share bulk data, and enable customers
to address niche requirements
1.4. (U FOUO) Drive an agile technology base mapped to the cognitive processes that underpin large
scale analysis, discovery, compliance and collaboration

2. (U FOUO) Fully leverage internal and external NSA partnerships to collaboratively discover targets,
find their vulnerabilities, and overcome their network/ communication defenses.

2.1. (U FOUO) Bolster our arsenal of capabilities against the most critical challenges
2.1.1. (S SI REL) Employ multidisciplinary approaches to problems, leveraging and
integrating mid-point and end-point capabilities to enable 

2.1.2. REL) Counter the challenge of ubiquitous, strong, commercial network 

2.1.3. (TS SI REL) Counter indigenous programs by targeting their industrial bases
with all available SIGINT and HUMINT capabilities

2.1.4. (TS SI REL) In?uence the global commercial market through commercial
relationships, HUMINT, and second and third party partners

2.1.5. Continue to invest in the industrial base and drive the state ofthe art for High
Performance Computing to maintain pre-eminent capability for the nation

2.2. (TS SI REL) Defeat adversary cybersecurity practices in order to acquire the SIGINT data we
need from anyone, anytime, anywhere

2.3. (S SI) Enable discovery capabilities and advanced tradecraft in the collection architecture to
enable the discovery of mission-critical persona, networks, accesses, signals and technologies

2.4. (S SI) Integrate capabilities into the mission architecture, deepen workforce skill base in
advanced network and signals analysis, and optimize processes and policies for the benefit of discovery

3. (S SI REL) Dynamically integrate endpoint, midpoint, industrial-enabled, and 
capabilities to reach previously inaccessible targets in support of exploitation, cyber defense, and cyber
operations

3.1. (C REL) Drive the SIGINT mission architecture to underpin integrated,
multi-capability operations, extending it to mission partners

3.2. (TS SI REL) Integrate the SIGINT system into a national network of sensors which interactively
sense, respond, and alert one another at machine speed

3.3. Continuously rebalance our portfolio of accesses and access capabilities based on
current and projected contributions to key SIGINT missions

3.4. REL) Identify new access, collection, and exploitation methods by leveraging global
business trends in data and communications services

4
TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

(U) In order to achieve these three mission goals, we must collectively liberate the innovation and
creativity of our workforce through technology, policies, and business processes hence, the following
two goals have been set:

4. (U) Collectively foster an environment that encourages and rewards diversity, empowerment,
innovation, risk-taking and agility

4.1. (U) Empower employees to make decisions and drive change; invest in and reward innovation,
risk-taking, and teaming

4.2. (U FOUO) Build compliance into systems and tools to ensure the workforce operates within the
law and without worry

4.3. (U) Work together to detail, implement, and evolve the strategy

4.4. (U) Provide everyone with the training and experiences necessary to lead the world?s most capable
SIGINT service and be competitive for Intelligence Community leadership positions

5. (U) Enable better, more efficient management of the mission and business by establishing new,
modifying current, and eliminating inefficient, business processes; by strengthening customer
relationships; and by building necessary internal and external partnerships.

5.1. (U FOUO) Pursue, develop, and implement policy consistent with the pace and scope of
operations

5.2. (U FOUO) Build into systems and tools, features that enable and automate end-to-end
value-based assessment of SIGINT products and services

5.3. (U FOUO) Create and sustain a mission management environment that is autonomic and agile
5.4. (U FOUO) mission, budget and acquisition, and technology and research activities to
deliver the capabilities required to keep SIGINT relevant

5.5. (U) Align and standardize administrative business processes throughout the SIGINT enterprise to
reduce the bureaucratic burden on the enterprise

5.6. Champion the development of a unified U.S. customer engagement strategy
that streamlines processes, increases resource efficiencies, eliminates redundancies, and strengthens
NSA relationships

5
TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

