FACEBOOK STATEMENT - RICHARD ALLAN - NOVEMBER 11, 2013

[I. INTRODUCTION]

My name is Richard Allan, and I am the Director of Public Policy
for Facebook in Europe, the Middle East and Africa.

I have been with Facebook since 2009 working on a wide range of
policy issues across the region.

I am grateful for the opportunity to be able to appear before the
Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs.

In my introductory remarks, I would like to cover 3 areas -

1)	a brief description of Facebook as a service;

2)	our policies and practices with respect to requests for data
from government agencies; and

3)	recent reports about government surveillance activities.

[II. BACKGROUND]

Facebook's mission is to help give people the power to share and
to make the world more open and connected. Facebook recently
reported that more than 1.2 billion people are using Facebook on a
regular basis across the globe, including many people throughout
Europe. Each month, Facebook enables every one of these users to

1

share information - photos, videos, status updates, and messages - with
their friends and family. It is therefore vital that Facebook retain the
trust of the people who use our service and maintain the security of
their data.

Facebook's Statement of Rights and Responsibilities and Data Use
Policy establish Facebook's relationship with the people who use our
service. Facebook provides extensive assistance to promote
understanding of these policies and ensure that people are able to make
use of the available privacy controls to share information in accordance
with their personal preferences. Facebook offers a comprehensive
online Help Center and a large User Operations team (or customer
support) that is available to people throughout the world. This team,
many of whom are based in Dublin, ensures that we can protect the
safety and privacy of people using our service in accordance with our
policies. The User Operations team evaluates reports from people who
use Facebook 24 hours a day and will take appropriate action against
any abuse they find.

Facebook also has a strong security team headed up by our Chief
Security Officer who ensure that we have the right technology, policies

2

and processes in place to keep our service and people who use it as
secure as possible. Examples of technologies they have deployed include
encrypting all user connections to Facebook by default and
sophisticated systems to detect unauthorized access to a user account.

Facebook is a global company. People from over 100 countries
regularly share and connect with our service. The Facebook service is
provided to European users by Facebook Ireland, our international
headquarters outside of the United States. Facebook Ireland is
regulated under the terms of the existing 1995 European Data
Protection Directive by the Office of the Data Protection Commissioner
in Ireland.

We have around 500 staff in our Dublin office who cover a wide
range of headquarters functions and support users and customers in
multiple languages. We have established other smaller offices in a
number of EU countries whose main function is to assist Facebook
Ireland in promoting its advertising products to business customers.

[III. DATA REQUESTS: POLICIES AND PRACTICES]

Let me turn now to Facebook's policies and practices on data
disclosure. Facebook has developed well-established processes for law

3

enforcement and governmental authorities around the world to submit
data requests. These processes are described in guidelines that we have
published publicly on our site. Law enforcement authorities in Europe
and elsewhere around the world can submit requests for data in official
investigations directly to Facebook through Facebook's Law
Enforcement Online Request System at www.facebook.com/records. by
fax or by post to Facebook Ireland. To ensure that these processes are
well-understood, Facebook representatives have provided guidance and
training for police officers in Europe, particularly those who focus on
Internet and child safety.

Facebook has stringent processes in place to handle all
government data requests. Facebook believes this process protects the
data of the people who use Facebook, and requires all governments to
meet a high legal bar. Facebook scrutinizes each request for legal
sufficiency under its terms and the strict letter of the law, and requires a
detailed description of the legal and factual bases for the request.
Facebook pushes back when it finds legal deficiencies and fights many
of these requests, and is often successful in narrowing the scope of
overly broad or vague requests. In many cases, Facebook is required to

4

share only very limited data about an account, such as basic subscriber
information.

Facebook is able to respond expeditiously to many European
requests, including cases where there is an imminent risk of death or
bodily harm. For instance, Facebook has worked with law enforcement
authorities in child abduction cases to assist in locating the missing
child.

The activities of Facebook Ireland's Law Enforcement Response
Team have been examined by the Office of the Data Protection
Commissioner during his audit of Facebook Ireland and his follow-up
report of 21st September 2012.

During the September 2012 review, the Data Protection
Commissioner found that all of the requests they examined met the
conditions in the Irish Data Protection Acts. They also stated their view
that “FB-I(reland) is appropriately assessing requests and either
seeking additional information or justification where it has concerns or
is refusing such requests”.

[IV. REPORTS ABOUT GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE]

Over the past several months, there's been a great deal of media

5

coverage and interest in the nature and extent of government requests
from online providers in national security investigations, and how
companies like Facebook respond to these requests. Much of this
coverage has been inaccurate or misleading. Facebook has therefore
taken a number of concrete steps to address these concerns.

First, Mark Zuckerberg, founder and CEO of Facebook, has
forcefully and repeatedly rejected false reports that Facebook had
somehow allowed “direct” or unfettered access by any government to
Facebook data. As he stated the day after these news reports first
surfaced:

“Facebook is not and has never been part of any program to give
the US or any other government direct access to our servers. We
have never received a blanket request or court order from any
government agency asking for information or metadata in bulk.
And if we did, we would fight it aggressively.”

Second, Facebook has released the maximum amount of
information allowed by law concerning the government data requests it
has received. In June, about a week after these reports and after intense

6

negotiations with the U.S. government, Facebook released a U.S.
government requests report that included all U.S. national security-
related requests - which no company had been permitted to do before
that time. These numbers showed the limited number of these data
requests. For the 6 months ending December 31, 2012, the total
number of user-data requests Facebook received from any and all
government entities in the U.S. (including local, state, and federal, and
including criminal and national security-related requests) - was
between 9,000 and 10,000. These requests run the gamut of matters -
from things like a local sheriff trying to find a missing child, to a police
department investigating an assault, to a national security official
investigating a terrorist threat. The total number of user accounts for
which data was requested pursuant to the entirety of those 9-10,000
requests was between 18,000 and 19,000 accounts.

In August, we supplemented our disclosures of U.S. request data
with a Global Government Requests Report that provided information
on the total number of government requests for user data that Facebook
had received from every country that submitted a data request for the
first half of 2013. The report stated that the total number of US requests
of all types was between 11-12,000, requesting information on 20-

7

21,000 accounts. Note that this US number includes any requests that
have been made on behalf of third countries, including EU countries,
through Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty arrangements. Through this
MLAT process, a request is made to the US Department of Justice by the
government of a country that is party to an MLAT arrangement and will
be served on Facebook by a US court in a similar way to a domestic US
request.

In addition, the report detailed the specific number of requests
from each European country. The total number of requests that came
directly from European Union countries for this period was 8,500.

These requests targeted approximately 10,000 accounts.

With more than 1.2 billion monthly active users worldwide, these
reports demonstrate that a tiny fraction of one percent of Facebook user
accounts were the subject of any kind of government request in the past
year. This helps put in perspective the numbers involved, and lays to
rest some of the hyperbolic and misleading assertions we have seen
about the frequency and scope of the data requests that Facebook
receives.

Third, Facebook, along with others in industry, has been pushing
the United States government for the ability to be even more

8

transparent about the government requests. In September, Facebook
filed a legal action with the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court in
Washington, D.C. seeking authority to disclose, at regular reporting
intervals, the total number of national security orders it has received, if
any; the total number of user accounts specified in such orders; and the
number of requests seeking the content of communications versus
those seeking transaction or subscriber information.

While transparency is a critical first step to an informed public
debate, we believe that more needs to be done. In late October,
Facebook joined several other providers in publicly calling for
government surveillance practices to be reformed to include substantial
enhancements to privacy protections and appropriate oversight and
accountability mechanisms for those programs. Together with a number
of other companies, we sent a letter that applauded Rep. Sensebrenner,
who I understand you have heard from today, and his colleagues for the
important contribution to the debate that their legislative proposal
represents.

[V. CONCLUSIDING REMARKS]

Facebook will continue to be vigilant in protecting our users' data

9

from unwarranted government requests, and will continue to ask all
governments to be as transparent as possible.

We are very interested in the work of elected representatives
around the world as they develop policy and legislation on access to
Internet data. We believe that we have a common goal in wanting there
to be widespread public trust in the way in which governments create
and use their powers in this sensitive area.

In that spirit, we are happy to do what we can to help the
European Parliament bring its expertise to bear on these complex
questions. And I hope that this statement and my responses to any
questions you have will help in that process.

10