2013 Annual Report
of the

Interception of

Communications

Commissioner

The Rt Hon.

Sir Anthony May

2013 Annual
Report of the
Interception of
Communications
Commissioner

Presented to Parliament pursuant to
Section 58(6) of the Regulation of
Investigatory Powers Act 2000

Ordered by the House of Commons to
be printed on 8th April 2014

Laid before the Scottish Parliament
by the Scottish Ministers 8th April 2014

HC 1184

SG/2014/25

OF

COMMUNICATIONS
COMMISSIONER'S
OFFICE

© Crown copyright 2014

You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under the terms of
the Open Government Licence v.2. To view this licence visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-
licence/version/2/ or email PSI@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk Where third party material has been identified,
permission from the respective copyright holder must be sought.

This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to: info@iocco-uk.info

You can download this publication from www.iocco-uk.info
Print ISBN 9781474101578
Web ISBN 9781474101585

Printed in the UK by the Williams Lea Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty's Stationery Office
ID 2633623 04/14

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum

INTERCEPTION

OF

COMMUNICATIONS

COMMISSIONER'S

OFFICE

The Rt Hon. David Cameron MP

Prime Minister

10 Downing Street

London

SW1A 2AA

April 2014

Dear Prime Minister,

You appointed me under Section 57(1) of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act
(RIPA) 2000 as Interception of Communications Commissioner to take office from 1st
January 2013 upon the retirement of the Rt Hon. Sir Paul Kennedy, who had held the
office for six years. I am required by Section 58(4) of RIPA to make a report to you with
respect to the carrying out of my statutory functions as soon as practical after the end
of each calendar year. This is my first annual report covering the calendar year 2013.

You are required to lay a copy of my annual report before each House of Parliament (Section
58(6)) together with a statement as to whether any matter has been excluded from that copy
because it has appeared to you after consulting me, that publication of that matter would be
contrary to the public interest or prejudicial to matters specified in Section 58(7) of RIPA. For
reasons which I discuss briefly in the body of this report, there is no suggested Confidential
Annex or matters to be excluded from publication. You may, of course, decide otherwise,
but my expectation is that you will feel able to lay this entire report before parliament.

Yours sincerely,

The Rt Hon. Sir Anthony May
Interception of Communications Commissioner

Interception of Communications Commissioner's Office (IOCCO)
Email: info@iocco-uk.info
Visit our website at www.iocco-uk.info

Contents

Section 1 Introduction	1

Section 2 My Role	2

RIPA Part I	2

Interception of content	2

Communications data	3

My main powers and duties	3

Reporting to the Prime Minister	4

Disclosure to the Commissioner	4

Prisons	4

Section 3 Interception of Communications	5

Applications for Interception Warrants	5

Statistics for Interception Warrants	8

Inspection Regime	9

Inspection Findings and Recommendations.	11

Retention, Storage and Destruction of intercepted material and
related communications data	13

Interception Errors	15

Points of Note	18

Section 4 Communications Data	19

Applications for Communications Data	19

Statistics for Communications Data	22

Inspection Regime	27

Communications Data Errors	34

Points of Note	38

Section 5 Media Disclosures and Public Concerns

39

Section 6 Questions of Concern

41

1.	Does the Interception of Communications Commissioner have full access to 41
all information from the public authorities sufficient for him to be able to
undertake his statutory functions?

2.	Does the Interception of Communications Commissioner have sufficient 41
resources to perform his statutory functions fully? And does he do so
sufficiently for public purposes?

3.	Is the Interception of Communications Commissioner fully independent of the 43
government and the public authorities?

4.	Should the Interception of Communications Commissioner be more open in 44
communicating with the public?

5. Is RIPA 2000 Part I fit for its required purpose in the developing internet age?	45

6. Do the interception agencies misuse their powers under RIPA 2000 Part I	56
Chapter I to engage in random mass intrusion into the private affairs of law
abiding UK citizens who have no actual or reasonably suspected involvement

in terrorism or serious crime? If the answer to that question is no, is there any
material risk that they or somebody might be able to intrude in this way?

7.	How can the public feel comfortable in the matter of interception when 61
everything is secret and the public does not know and cannot find out what

the interception agencies are doing?

8.	Do British intelligence agencies receive from US agencies intercept material 62
about British citizens which could not lawfully be acquired by intercept in the

UK and vice versa and thereby circumvent domestic oversight regimes?

Points of Note	63

Section 7 Prisons	65

Background	65

Authorisations to Intercept Prisoners Communications	66

Inspection Regime	67

Inspection Findings and Recommendations	68

Points of Note	72

Appendix 1: Decision of the IPT about section 8(4) of RIPA 2000	74

Annex A: Public Authorities with access to Communications Data	76

Annex B: Total Notices & Authorisation for each	Public Authority	78

Annex C: Budget	82

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Section 1
Introduction

1.1	This report is rather differently presented, both in its form and some of its content,
from recent reports of my predecessors.

1.2	My first aim is to fulfil my statutory obligation for 2013 to report annually to the
Prime Minister. My second aim is to address, so far as I am able in a report to be laid
before Parliament, public concerns relevant to my statutory function raised by media
publications based on disclosures reportedly made during 2013 as a result of Edward
Snowden's actions.

1.3	Some of these disclosures have related to alleged interception activities of UK
intelligence agencies. They have suggested that these agencies have, or may have,
misused their interception powers or capabilities. It was plain that I should investigate
these suggestions thoroughly, which I now have.

1.4	Public concern has centred on potential intrusive invasion of privacy. Such concern
has been expressed publicly in the United States, Europe and other countries with greater
force perhaps than in the UK. But unjustified and disproportionate invasion of privacy
by a public authority in the UK would breach Article 8 of the European Convention on
Human Rights just as much here as in other parts of the European Union.

1.5	Concerns of this kind are legitimately raised and need to be addressed. They
derive to a significant extent from a lack of detailed understanding of the legislation which
enables lawful interception of communications to take place; and a lack of information
about what the interception agencies actually do or, just as importantly, what they do
not do.

1.6	I have very considerable sympathy with those who are hazy about the details
of the legislation. The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (RIPA 2000) is a
difficult statute to understand. An important change of presentation in this report is that
I shall give a narrative outline of the relevant statutory provisions in what I hope will be
a reasonably accessible form with an eye to the disclosures. Because RIPA 2000 Part I is
difficult legislation, this narrative may in places be dense and perhaps itself indigestible.
I have tried to make it as accessible as possible, but apologise if I have not entirely
achieved this.

1.7	It is not so easy to give a relevant public account of what the interception agencies
actually do because much of it is sensitive. In this report, I am constrained by statutory
provisions forbidding disclosure. But an important change of presentation in this report
is that I shall try to be more informative than my predecessors felt they needed to be.
To this end, I am not submitting any suggested Confidential Annex to this report to the
Prime Minister1. I do not consider that a confidential annex is presently necessary. That
does not mean that one may not be needed in the future.

1.8	I have included at the end of each of the main Sections of the report "Points of
Note" which summarise highlights of the contents of those Sections.

1	It is strictly for the Prime Minister to decide which parts of this report should be made public by laying
them before Parliament - see section 58(7) of RIPA 2000.

1

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Section 2
My Role

2.1	I was appointed as Commissioner in January 2013.
It necessarily took me some time to become familiar with
the details of RIPA 2000 Part I and its Codes of Practice and
with the procedures which these require. I also needed
to get to grips with the various technical operations
and systems which the public authorities undertake or
use. I ventured conversationally at the outset that this
familiarisation and education process might take me up
to a year. In the round, so it has proved.

2.2	My principal powers and duties are in section
57(2) of RIpA 2000. They relate mainly to RIPA 2000 Part
I (sections 1 to 25).

The Rt Hon. Sir Anthony May

RIPA Part I

2.3	RIPA 2000 Part I divides into two Chapters.

•	Chapter I (sections 1 to 20) concerns the interception of the content of
communications and the obtaining of related communications data.

•	Chapter II (sections 21 to 25) concerns the acquisition and disclosure of
communications data. Communications data do not embrace the content of
the communication.

Interception of content

2.4	Section 1(1) of RIPA 2000 makes it an offence for a person intentionally
and without lawful authority to intercept, at any place in the United Kingdom, any
communication in the course of its transmission by means of a public postal service or
public telecommunication system. My statutory role concerns interception within the
United Kingdom.

2.5	Interception Warrants. The main source of lawful authority to intercept the
content of a communication is a warrant issued by a Secretary of State under section 5 of
RIPA 20002. There are detailed requirements for these warrants. There are also detailed
restrictions and safeguards on the use that may lawfully be made of the product of lawful
interception of communications. Importantly, section 15(3) requires the destruction of
intercepted material and any related communications data (as defined in section 20)
as soon as there are no longer any grounds for retaining it as necessary for any of the
purposes authorised in section 15, which embrace the statutory purposes in section 5(3).

2	See section 1(5) of RIPA 2000 for other sources of lawful authority.

2

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

2.6 The requirements of Part I Chapter I are supplemented in detail by a Code of
Practice "Interception of Communications" laid before both Houses of Parliament by the
Secretary of State and approved by a resolution of each House (sections 71(1), (4), (5)
and (9)).

Communications data

2.7	The structured procedure required by Part I Chapter II for the acquisition and
disclosure of communications data is different. Here essentially the statutory authority has
to be an authorisation granted or requirement made by a senior designated person (DP)
in the relevant public authority, who should normally be independent of the investigation
to which the application relates (sections 22(3), (4)).

2.8	The provisions of Part I Chapter II are supplemented by a detailed Code of Practice
"Acquisition and Disclosure of Communications Data" again laid before Parliament and
approved by resolution under section 71.

My main powers and duties

2.9	These are under section 57(2) and relate to RIPA 2000 Part I. They are to keep
under review;

•	the exercise and performance of the Secretary of State of the powers and
duties in sections 1 to 11, that is those relating to the granting and operation
of interception warrants;

•	the exercise and performance by the persons on whom they are conferred
or imposed of the powers and duties under Part I Chapter II, that is those
relating to the acquisition and disclosure of communications data; and

•	the adequacy of arrangements for safeguards relating to use that is made
of interception material under section 15, which also embraces additional
safeguards in section 16.

2.10	In short, I am required to audit the interception of the content of communications
and the acquisition and disclosure of communications data under RIPA 2000 Part I. I
am not involved with matters which are the responsibility of the Intelligence Services
Commissioner (The Rt Hon. Sir Mark Waller) or the Chief Surveillance Commissioner (The
Rt Hon. Sir Christopher Rose).

3

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Reporting to the Prime Minister

2.11	I regard my principal function as being to satisfy myself, and thus to report to the
Prime Minister, that the Secretaries of State and the public authorities operating under
RIPA 2000 Part I do so lawfully and in accordance with the statute.

2.12	I am required by section 58(2) to report to the Prime Minister contraventions
of the provisions of the Act in relation to any matter with which I am concerned that
has not been the subject of a report made to the Prime Minister by the Investigatory
Powers Tribunal (IPT). I am not aware of any such report by the IPT which bears on my
responsibilities. The Errors Sections of this Report (see Paragraphs 3.58 to 3.68 & 4.45 to
4.54) constitute a principal part of the performance of the requirements of section 58(2).

2.13	My principal statutory responsibility is to review the lawfulness of RIPA 2000 Part
I activities under existing legislation. I do not regard myself as a practical promoter
of legislation. Change and matters of policy are for others, Parliament in particular, to
consider and decide. On the other hand, I am better informed than most people outside
the public authorities themselves about the way in which RIPA 2000 Part I activities are
conducted both in principle and in detail. Addressing, as I shall attempt to do, some of
the issues which are of public concern can only be done if I touch on some matters of
policy.

Disclosure to the Commissioner

2.14	Section 58(1) of RIPA 2000 imposes a statutory obligation on everyone concerned
with the lawful interception of communications and the acquisition and disclosure of
communications data under RIPA 2000 Part I to disclose or provide to me all such
documents or information as I may require for the purpose of enabling me to carry out
my functions under section 57. I have found that everyone does this without inhibition.
I am thus fully informed, or able to make myself fully informed, about all the interception
and communications data activities to which RIPA 2000 Part I relates however sensitive
these may be.

Prisons

2.15	My functions also by convention include the oversight of the interception of
prisoners' communications within prisons. This is lawful interception under section 47
of the Prison Act 1952, section 39 of the Prisons (Scotland) Act 1989 and section 13 of
the Prison Act (Northern Ireland) 1953 (prison rules) - see section 4(4) of RIPA 2000. My
oversight of interception in prisons in England, Wales and Northern Ireland (but not at
the moment Scotland) is by non-statutory agreement between the prison authorities and
my predecessors.

4

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Section 3

Interception of Communications

3.1	In this section I shall provide an outline of the interception legislation, give details
in relation to our interception inspection regime and outline the key findings from our
inspections.

Applications for Interception Warrants

3.2	The main mechanism by which interception of communications may be lawful
under RIPA 2000 Part I requires the Secretary of State to issue an interception warrant
under section 5(1). The conduct authorised by an interception warrant includes conduct
to obtain the content of the communication and also conduct to obtain related
communications data (as defined in section 20 and Part I Chapter II).

3.3	Applicant. An application for an interception warrant cannot be issued except on
an application made by or on behalf of the persons listed in section 6(2) of RIPA 2000.
Those persons are;

•	the Director General of the Security Service (Mi5),

•	the Chief of the Secret Intelligence Service (Mi6),

•	the Director of the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ),

•	the Director General of the National Crime Agency,

•	the Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police,

•	the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI),

•	the Chief Constable of Police Scotland,

•	the Commissioners of Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs (HMRC),

•	the Chief of Defence Intelligence, Ministry of Defence.

3.4	Secretaries of State. Interception warrants have to be authorised personally by a
Secretary of State (section 5(1) and 7(1)(a)). The Secretary of State has to sign the warrant
personally, except in an urgent case where the Secretary of State has authorised the issue
of a warrant which is then signed by a senior official (section 7(1)(b)).

3.5	There are in practice four Secretaries of State and one Scottish Minister who
undertake the main burden of authorising (or declining) interception warrants. The
Secretaries of State and Minister mainly concerned are;

•	the Foreign Secretary;

•	the Home Secretary;

•	the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland;

•	the Defence Secretary; and

•	the Cabinet Secretary for Justice for Scotland3.

3	Interception warrants may be issued on "serious crime" grounds by Scottish Ministers, by virtue of
arrangements under the Scotland Act 1998. In this report references to the "Secretary of State" should be
read as including Scottish Ministers where appropriate. The functions of the Scottish Ministers also cover
renewal and cancellation arrangements.

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

3.6	Each of the Secretaries of State have senior officials and staff. Their functions
include scrutinising warrant applications for their form, content and sufficiency, and
presenting them to the relevant Secretary of State with appropriate suggestions.

3.7	Statutory necessity purposes. The Secretary of State is forbidden from issuing
an interception warrant unless he or she believes that it is necessary:

•	in the interests of national security;

•	for the purpose of preventing or detecting serious crime;

•	for the purpose of safeguarding the economic wellbeing of the United
Kingdom (which has to be directly related to state security).4

•	for the purpose, in circumstances appearing to the Secretary of State to be
equivalent to those in which he would issue a serious crime warrant to give
effect to the provisions of any international mutual assistance agreement
(section 5(3)).

3.8	These statutory purposes and the requirement of necessity come directly from
Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. To issue an interception warrant for any
other purpose would be unlawful. Needless to say, Secretaries of State do not issue
interception warrants for other purposes. It is part of my function to make sure that they
do not.

3.9	Proportionality. The Secretary of State is forbidden from issuing an interception
warrant unless he or she believes that the conduct authorised by the warrant is
proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by that conduct.

3.10	Proportionality pervades human rights jurisprudence and is explicitly central to
the lawful operation of RIPA 2000. Every application for a Part I Chapter I interception
warrant has to address proportionality explicitly. Secretaries of State have to address
proportionality in the judgment they apply to decide whether or not to issue an
interception warrant. A judgment whether it is proportionate to issue the interception
warrant requires holding a balance between (a) the necessity to engage in potentially
intrusive conduct and (b) the anticipated amount and degree of intrusion. The judgment
has to consider whether the information which is sought could reasonably be obtained
by other less intrusive means. This is explicit for interception (section 5(4)). Warrants are
refused (or never applied for) where it is judged that the necessity does not outweigh
the intrusion.

3.11	Types of Interception Warrants. There are essentially two types of interception
warrants. Section 8(1) warrants and section 8(4) warrants.

3.12	All interception warrants are for the interception of the content of communications

4	See Directive 97/66/EC.

6

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

and related communications data.

3.13	All interception warrants may comprise communications not identified in the
warrant whose interception is necessary in order to do what the warrant expressly
authorises (section 5(6)). These are communications which you cannot technically avoid
intercepting if you are going to intercept the communications which the warrant expressly
authorises.

3.14	All applications for warrants have to be in writing and usually cover several pages.
The Secretaries of State have available to them in the applications detailed supporting
information including specific sections directed to the protection of privacy.

3.15	Interception warrants have an initial duration of 6 months where the statutory
purpose is national security or economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom, but 3 months
where the statutory purpose is serious crime (section 9(6)). They cease to have effect at
the end of the period unless they are renewed.

3.16	An interception warrant may be renewed at the end of the relevant period by the
Secretary of State personally, but only if the Secretary of State believes that it continues
to be necessary for a statutory purpose (section 9(2) and paragraphs 4.13 and 4.14 of
the Code of Practice). Applications for renewals have to contain details justifying the
necessity for renewal giving an assessment of the intelligence value of the interception
to date.

3.17	The Secretary of State is required to cancel an interception warrant if he or she
is satisfied that it is no longer necessary for the authorised purpose (section 9(3) and
paragraph 4.16 of the Code of Practice). This in practice means that the interception
agency should apply for cancellation of a warrant that is no longer necessary.

3.18	Exceptionally a warrant may be issued in an urgent case by a senior official if it
is expressly authorised by a Secretary of State (section 7(1)(b), 7(2)(a) and paragraph 4.6
of the Code of Practice). An urgent warrant lasts for 5 days unless it is renewed by the
Secretary of State (section 9(6)(a)).

3.19	Section 8(1) interception warrants must name or describe either (a) one person
as the interception subject, or (b) a single set of premises as the premises to which the
permitted interception relates (section 8(1) itself). The definition of "person" in section
81(1) includes any organisation or any association or combination of persons, but that
does not detract from the individuality of the required warrant definition.

3.20	A section 8(1) warrant should contain the details required by paragraph 4.2 of the
Code of Practice. The required details include: •

•	the background of the operation,

•	the relevant person or premises the subject of the application;

•	the communications to be intercepted;

7

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

•	an explanation of the necessity for the interception;

•	a consideration of why the conduct is proportionate;

•	consideration of any unusual degree of collateral intrusion, not least if the
communications might be privileged; and

•	an assurance that all intercepted material will be handled in accordance
with the safeguards in section 15 of RIPA 2000.

3.21	Section 8(1) warrants have to comprise one or more schedules with details designed
to tell the relevant communication service provider (CSP) which communications they are
required to intercept (section 8(2)).

3.22	Section 8(4) interception warrants. Section 8(4) disapplies the provisions of
section 8(1) and 8(2) in certain circumstances. This means that a section 8(4) warrant does
not have to name or describe one person as the interception subject or a single set of
premises as the target of the interception.

3.23	Section 8(4) warrants are restricted to the interception of external communications.
External communications are communications sent or received outside of the British
Islands (see section 20).

3.24	Section 8(4) warrants should contain the details required by paragraph 5.2 of the
Code of Practice. I have for convenience described the statutory structure for section
8(4) warrants in further detail in Section 6 (Question 5) of this report to which I refer the
reader.

3.25	Safeguards. These apply to both types of interception warrants. Section 15(2)
strictly controls the dissemination of intercepted material. The section requires that
dissemination of intercepted material is limited to the minimum necessary for the
authorised purposes. All material (including related communications data) intercepted
under section 8(1) or 8(4) must be handled in accordance with safeguards which the
Secretary of State has approved under the duty imposed by RIPA 2000.

3.26	Section 15(3) requires that each copy of intercepted material and any related
communications data is destroyed as soon as there are no longer grounds for retaining
it as necessary for any of the authorised purposes.

3.27	There are additional safeguards for Section 8(4) warrants and these are described
in Section 6 (Question 5) of this report.

Statistics for Interception Warrants

3.28	Figure 1 shows the number of interception warrants authorised in each of the years
2011 - 2013 for the 9 relevant interception agencies. The total number of interception
warrants authorised during the calendar year 2013 was 2760. This is a reduction of 19%

8

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Figure 1 Total Number of Interception Warrants Authorised 2011-13

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

2011	2012	2013

Year

on 2012. The total number of warrants extant on 31 December 2013 was 1669. These
numbers generally show, as is the fact, that numerous warrants do not run for longer
than a number of months.

Inspection Regime

3.29	Objectives of Inspections. The primary objectives of our inspections are to
ensure:

•	that the systems in place for the interception of communications are sufficient
for the purposes of the Part I Chapter I and that all relevant records have been
kept;

•	that all interception has been carried out lawfully and in accordance with Part
I Chapter I and its associated Code of Practice; and,

•	that any "errors" are reported to me and that the systems are reviewed and
adapted where any weaknesses or faults are exposed.

3.30	Number of Inspections. I have since I was appointed personally undertaken
a full programme of interception agency inspections. I have inspected each of the 9
interception agencies authorised to apply for interception warrants at approximately six
monthly intervals, that is twice each during 2013.

3.31	The first series of inspections was in the Spring and early Summer. They mainly
followed the pattern established by Sir Paul Kennedy, my predecessor, as described in his

9

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

2012 Report. They enabled me to become more familiar with the requirements of my
statutory role.

3.32	The second series of inspections was in the Autumn and Winter of 2013. For
these, we made some significant changes in our procedures as follows:

•	we increased the inspection time spent with each interception agency. Most
of the inspections ran over two days, the first of which we generally used
for reading warrantry and other documents in preparation for the second
day's investigations. These investigations covered those selected operations
or warrants which required further explanation;

•	we carried out or continued a full investigation where necessary into matters
raised by media disclosures;

•	we instigated a thorough investigation of the arrangements in place for
the Retention, Storage and Destruction of intercepted material and related
communications data. (See paragraphs 3.48 to 3.57 for further detail);

•	we instituted what will now become our standard procedure of producing
a detailed written report and recommendations from each inspection. This
is sent to the Head of the relevant interception agency with a copy for the
relevant Secretary of State.

3.33	I also inspected the work of the senior officials and staff in the relevant parts of
the main Secretary of State departments at six monthly intervals. The officials provide
good support and advice to the Secretaries of State and are a channel of communication
and advice with the interception agencies. I visited the main warrant issuing Secretaries
of State at the end of the 20l3 or early in 2014.

3.34	In addition to 26 interception inspections conducted in 2013, I also visited the
interception agencies on a number of occasions to follow up points arising from our
inspections or on other matters.

3.35	Examination of warrants. We inspect the systems in place for applying for
and issuing interception warrants under sections 8(1) and 8(4). We scrutinise what I
regard as a representative sample (chosen by me) of the warrantry paperwork. In this
context warrantry paperwork includes warrant applications, renewals, modifications,
cancellations and their associated instruments and schedules. Much of this is on paper,
but in some interception agencies we now have access to and personally interrogate the
computer systems that the agencies use. This enables us to audit the process from start
to end and to examine the product gained from the interception.

3.36	Samples. The total number of warrant applications specifically inspected
during the 26 interception inspections was approximately 600. The associated warrantry
paperwork in relation to these applications was also examined. This represents just over
one third of the number extant at the end of the year and one fifth of the total of new
warrants issued during the year.

10

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

3.37	It is important that we scrutinise a sufficient representative sample of the individual
warrants. The representative sample includes appropriate selections from various crime
types and national security threats. But, in my view, inspecting and understanding systems
is in the end as important as scrutinising yet more individual warrant applications.

3.38	Inspection Reports. The reports contain formal recommendations with a
requirement for the interception agency to report back to me within two months to say
that the recommendations have been implemented, or what progress has been made.
These are sensitive documents, but, speaking generally, they contain:

•	an account of the inspection, including a list of the particular warrants
inspected;

•	assessments of the interception agency's compliance with statutory
requirements;

•	an account of the errors reported by the interception agency to my office
during the inspection period; and

•	a number of structural recommendations aimed at improving the interception
agency's compliance and performance generally.

Inspection Findings and Recommendations.

3.39	My inspections demonstrate that the paperwork is almost always compliant and
of a high quality. If there are occasional technical lapses, these are almost always ironed
out in the interception agencies themselves or in the Secretary of State's department
before the application reaches the relevant Secretary of State.

3.40	The Secretaries of State themselves are entirely conscientious in undertaking their
RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter I duties. They do not rubber stamp applications. On the contrary,
they sometimes reject applications or require more information. Since a warrant cannot
be issued for a shorter period than the statutory period, Secretaries of State sometimes
require a report to be made to them within a short time period - for example after 1 or 2
weeks - of the effectiveness in practice of the warrant. This is with a view to its possible
cancellation if in the light of experience it can no longer be properly justified.

3.41	The total number of specific recommendations made in our inspection reports
for the 9 interception agencies was 65, on average about 7 recommendations for each
agency. Figure 2 (overleaf) shows the breakdown of recommendations by category.

3.42	Some of the 65 are the same recommendation for more than one agency, for
example that the agency should keep its Retention, Storage and Destruction policy
and schedule up to date for my continuing inspection (see my investigation on this in
paragraphs 3.48 to 3.57 of this report).

11

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

3.43	I have expressed concern with a number of areas of the authorisation process,
for example, delays in the serving of the warrant instruments (and schedules) on the
Communication Service Providers (CSPs).

3.44	I regarded as unsatisfactory the fact that a number of the interception agencies
have to apply to renew their warrants excessively early. This results in significantly
shortened periods of authorisation. In some cases the applicants have to prepare their
renewals a number of weeks before they are due to enable them to be processed in time.
Serious crime warrants can only be authorised for a 3 month period. This means that an
applicant may have to submit renewal paperwork only a few weeks after the interception
was initially authorised. Understandably in some cases there has not been sufficient time

Figure 2 Interception Recommendations by Category

confidential privileged
material 5%

renewals 3%

to gain a detailed intelligence picture and as a result it can be hard to articulate the
benefit and justify the continuance. In addition renewing early causes the intervening
authorisation period to be lost and therefore warrants of this kind are frequently not in
force for the full 3 month period. A further consequence of early renewal is that warrants
are often subject to unnecessary renewals. This places a burden on the interception
agencies and the Secretary of State and a strain on the system. There is a strong practical
case for increasing the validity period for serious crime warrants to 6 months.

3.45	For some of the interception agencies I was not satisfied that all applications to
cancel warrants which were no longer necessary were being made promptly. There was
also a delay in effecting cancellations in one of the Secretary of State's departments. The
second of these has been addressed. I have recommended that the agencies in question

12

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

should be more scrupulous in applying for the cancellation of a warrant which is no
longer necessary for a statutory purpose. In almost all such instances the cancellation
is a paper formality (albeit a statutory necessity), because the actual interception will
have been stopped by technical intervention. But I have regarded these necessary formal
cancellations as important. Otherwise there is a rather greater risk of error (as in fact
happened in at least one instance during the year).

3.46	I made recommendations to ensure that the required procedures for the handling
of confidential privileged material are properly observed. There are detailed requirements
on this subject in Chapter 3 of the Interception of Communications Code of Practice,
which include the circumstances in which the interception of confidential privileged
material have to be brought to my attention.

3.47	My impression is that the interception agencies and the Secretaries of State
appreciate the inspection reports. We shall continue to issue them and in the process
refine their form and content. A large number of the recommendations have already
been addressed by the interception agencies or Secretary of State departments or, if not,
I have been assured that work is underway to achieve them. Some require changes to
systems and processes which will take time to achieve. I will check progress during my
first round of 2014 inspections.

Retention, Storage and Destruction of intercepted
material and related communications data

3.48	I decided soon after I was appointed to conduct a detailed investigation into the
arrangements for Retention, Storage and Destruction of intercepted material and related
communications data by each of the 9 interception agencies. I decided to do this, as it
happened, before the media disclosures started, because it seemed to me to be relevant
generally to compliance with the statutory safeguards. The formal requests were made
afterwards in August 2013 and with an eye to some of the disclosures. This investigation
was in addition to my routine inspections of these agencies.

3.49	My request for information. I sent a common letter to each of the 9 interception
agencies. This asked them to provide full and systematically organised information about
the Retention, Storage and Destruction of the product of interception for all relevant
interception operations. I asked for particular reference to every database in which
intercepted material and related communications data is stored.

3.50	My letter required the interception agencies to have an eye to section 15(3) of
RIPA 2000, which provides:

"The requirements of this subsection are satisfied in relation to the intercepted
material and any related communications data if each copy, made of any of
the material or data (if not destroyed earlier) is destroyed as soon as there are
no longer any grounds for retaining it as necessary for any of the authorised
purposes."

13

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

3.51	I explained my reasons for this as including my perception that there was
understandable public concern about the necessity and proportionality and the potential
intrusion caused by interception of communications on the scale which the agencies
were believed to engage in. This included my understanding that the true heart of
this concern was (or might be) a general relatively uninformed fear that large scale
interception by government controlled agencies might risk providing the government,
a future government, the interception agencies, malign individuals or conceivably cyber
intruders with an opportunity or ability to intrude ("snoop") into the private lives of
individuals who have no connection with any threat to national security, serious crime or
any other justifiable statutory purpose for interception.

3.52	My thought was that a full understanding by me of the Retention, Storage and
Destruction of intercepted material was central to an appreciation of such potential
intrusion as there might be. This should enable me to inform the Prime Minister in
appropriate terms (and, through him, the public) of the true informed measure of any
justifiable public fear in this respect. I explained that if I were not myself satisfied in any
respect, I would require that the agency take steps to achieve compliance.

3.53	The responses. All 9 interception agencies responded to my requests in full
and with full cooperation. In the result my office now has, and I have fully considered,
tabulated information on this topic containing specific answers to all the questions by all
the agencies. For obvious reasons of sensitivity, I cannot make public individual details,
but I am able to say the following: •

•	there is a variety of different retention and storage systems used by each of
the interception agencies. These have developed over time to accommodate
the nature of the different operations which they undertake. There is thus
unsurprisingly little consistency in detail;

•	none of the interception agencies retain and store for more that a short
period the contents of intercepted communications which do not relate to a
warranted target or which are of no legitimate intelligence interest. In some
systems irrelevant content is deleted manually, in others automatically. A
typical period is 24 hours, although some are shorter than this and others
rather longer. For example, an interception agency may delete the content of
the intercepted communications of a warranted suspected serious criminal
straight away if they are not of intelligence interest;

•	as to the content of communications which do relate to a warranted target
and which are of legitimate intelligence interest, retention periods again vary
depending on the legitimate intelligence use to which this may be put. But
section 15(3) of RIPA 2000 applies to it and my investigations have satisfied me
that its provisions are properly observed. For example, an interception agency
may delete the content of the intercepted communications of a warranted
suspected serious criminal that are of legitimate intelligence interest when
the target is arrested and charged or when the relevant operation comes to
an end;

•	lawfully intercepted related communications data may in some interception
agencies and for technical reasons be stored separately from the content

14

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

with longer retention periods. I have recognised that there may be legitimate
differences of opinion as to what periods should be applied.

3.54	Having received this tabulated information, I was able to discuss it in detail with
each of the interception agencies during my autumn 2013 inspections. I received technical
briefings from systems administrators and IT staff and demonstrations where relevant.
This enabled me to report back to the interception agencies with a summary of my
understanding of their systems in this respect and, in some instances, recommendations
for adjustments.

3.55	What this investigation has demonstrated is that indiscriminate retention for long
periods of unselected intercepted material (content) does not occur. If it did, it would
be a breach of section 15(3) of RIPA 2000. The interception agencies delete intercepted
material (if it is retained at all) after short periods, and in accordance with section 15(3)
of RIPA 2000.

3.56	Lawfully intercepted related communications data are in some instances retained
for a variety of longer periods. On this point, I have yet to satisfy myself fully that some
of the retention periods are justified. To an extent, this is work in progress which I shall
carry forward. I have made some recommendations in this area and I have required the
relevant agencies to report back to me on their progress. In the main, the recommended
adjustments comprise a shortening of some individual retention periods or, if not,
providing me with more persuasive reasons for keeping the current periods. I shall report
further in due course once this work is completed.

3.57	I have in addition asked all the interception agencies to maintain their tabulated
schedules and keep them up to date.

Interception Errors

3.58	It is my duty under sections 58(2) and (3) of RIPA 2000 to report to the Prime
Minister any contravention of the provisions of the Act, or, any inadequate discharge of
section 15 duties (safeguards).

3.59	My predecessors have disclosed the number of errors that have been reported to
them each calendar year. This is in principle straightforward for Chapter II communications
data, but less so for the interception of communications. This is because, although there
is specific provision for errors in the Acquisition and Disclosure of Communications
Data Code of Practice (paragraphs 6.9 - 6.25 refer), there is no similar provision in the
Interception of Communications Code of Practice. As a consequence there is no mention
of the word "error" or related definition for interception. This leaves the interception
agencies and my office struggling with an ill-defined framework. However, in my
experience the interception agencies are keen to come forward and report to my office
any instances which they judge to be errors.

15

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

3.60	Even though I am satisfied there is a good culture of self reporting, investigations
by my office this year have identified that there is a lack of consistency in relation to the
types of instances that are reported. This is because different thresholds and judgments
are applied by each interception agency.

3.61	It is my view that there should be an equivalent error provision in the Interception
of Communications Code of Practice to that in the Communications Data Code of Practice.
Since errors are not easily classified, it requires a lot of thought as to how that provision
should be expressed. In the absence of this I will be seeking to agree a memorandum of
understanding in this area with the interception agencies to ensure there is consistency
in the judgments that are applied and ultimately the errors that are reported. The
consultation between my office and the interception agencies on this subject to date has

Figure 3 Breakdown of Interception Errors

indicated that this initiative would be welcomed.

3.62	With the preceding paragraphs in mind, the total number of interception errors
reported to our office during the calendar year was 57. The breakdown of the causes of
these errors is contained in Figure 3.

3.63	66% of the errors were attributable to the interception agencies and 20% to the
Communication Service Providers (CSPs) when giving effect to an interception warrant.
14% of the errors were caused by police forces not having the necessary authority in place
to access stored communications from mobile devices or computers (i.e. text messages,
voice mails and emails). It is important to note that these errors were not made by the
interception agencies in relation to lawful interception warrants.

16

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

3.64	The largest category of errors is identified as 'inadequate discharge of sections
15/16 duties'. This is a wide category and can mean different things. One example might
be where an analyst had continued to select the communications of an individual based
overseas after the individual was known to have entered the UK. Another might be where
a technical system malfunctioned causing it to select unwanted data for examination. In
these instances the communications had been lawfully intercepted under a section 8(1)
or 8(4) warrant, but the resultant action was a breach of the section 15 safeguards. Where
necessary I have been satisfied that technical system faults have been fixed or analysts
have undertaken further training and supervision to prevent recurrence.

3.65	Although looking at the causes of the errors is of importance in order to take steps
to prevent recurrence, it is equally important to consider the consequences of the errors.
Where errors are caused by a single technical fault, there may be many consequences.
Where communications have been wrongly intercepted, the consequences could be
serious.

3.66	On occasions errors occur which are not the responsibility of the interception
agencies. For example in one instance the interception agency received the telephone
number to be intercepted in good faith from another agency. It subsequently transpired
that the other agency had made a transposition error. In this example the Secretary of
State gave proper consideration to all of the relevant facts in the interception application
and lawfully authorised the warrant - but the telephone number did not in the end relate
to the individual of interest. There has been ambiguity in the past as to whether errors
of this kind should be reported. They do not constitute contraventions of the Act as
the conduct had lawful authority. But I consider that such instances should be reported
where they have resulted in unintentional invasion of privacy.

3.67	We have also come across instances where typographical errors have occurred on
warrantry paperwork, but where no consequence followed because they were identified
and rectified and never acted on. I do not consider that these need to be reported.
But the interception agencies should still take steps to ensure so far as is possible that
mistakes of this kind do not occur, since they could have serious consequences.

3.68	In the majority of instances I was satisfied with the timeliness of the error reports
received by my office. However, I raised concerns with two of the interception agencies
on this point. Some of the more complicated technical errors may understandably take
time to investigate fully. In these cases I agreed that the agencies could send me an initial
notification at the point at which it is clear that an error has occurred and then follow
this up with a full report once the cause of the error has been fully ascertained and the
measures put in place to prevent recurrence. In the more straightforward cases I would
expect to receive a full report straight away and systems have been put in place at the
agencies to ensure that this now happens.

17

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Points of Note

— Interception of Communications

2760 interception warrants (to access the content of communications) were
authorised in 2013, a reduction of 19% on the previous year.

In 2013 I conducted 26 interception inspections. During the inspections 600
interception warrants were examined which is one third of the extant warrants at
the end of the year.

A total of 65 recommendations emanated from these inspections, on average 7
recommendations for each interception agency.

In 2013 and since, I have conducted a number of further detailed interception
investigations. A number of these related to media publications based on
disclosures reportedly made as a result of Edward Snowden's actions. These
feature in Section 6 of this report as Questions of Concern.

My investigation into the Retention, Storage and Deletion of intercepted material
and related communications data has demonstrated that:

•	indiscriminate retention for long periods of unselected intercepted
material (content) does not occur. The interception agencies delete
intercepted material (if it is retained at all) after short periods and in
accordance with section 15(3) of RIPA;

•	related communications data are in some instances retained for a
variety of longer periods. I have yet to satisfy myself fully that some
of these periods are justified and in those cases I have required the
agencies to shorten their retention periods or, if not, provide me with
more persuasive reasons for keeping the material for the current
periods.

57 interception errors were reported to our office in 2013. There is no specific
provision in the Interception of Communications Code of Practice for errors and
this leads to a lack of consistency in the reporting. In the absence of a specific
provision I will be seeking to agree a memorandum of understanding with the
agencies.

Our inspections and investigations lead me to conclude that the Secretaries of
State and the agencies that undertake interception operations under RIPA 2000
Chapter I Part I do so lawfully, conscientiously, effectively and in the national
interest. This is subject to the specific errors reported and the inspection
recommendations. These require attention but do not materially detract from the
judgment expressed in the first sentence.

18

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Section 4

Communications Data

4.1	In this section I shall provide an outline of the communications data legislation,
give details in relation to our communications data inspection regime and summarise the
key findings from our inspections.

4.2	RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter II (sections 21 to 25) concerns the acquisition and
disclosure of communications data. Communications data colloquially embrace the 'who',
'when' and 'where' of a communication but not the content, what was said or written. Put
shortly, communications data comprise of the following.

•	Traffic data which is data that may be attached to a communication for the
purpose of transmitting it and could appear to identify the sender and recipient
of the communication, the location from which and the time at which it was
sent, and other related material (see sections 21(4)(a) and 21(6) and (7) RIPA
and Paragraphs 2.19 to 2.22 of the Communications Data Code of Practice).

•	Service use information which is data relating to the use made by any person
of a communication service and may be the kind of information that habitually
used to appear on a Communications Service Provider's (CSP's) itemised
billing document to customers (see section 21(4)(b) and Paragraphs 2.23 and
2.24 of the Communications Data Code of Practice).

•	Subscriber information which is data held or obtained by a CSP in relation to
a customer and may be the kind of information which a customer typically
provides when they sign up to use a service. For example, the recorded name
and address of the subscriber of a telephone number or the account holder
of an email address. (See section 21(4)(c) and Paragraphs 2.25 and 2.26 of the
Communications Data Code of Practice).

Applications for Communications Data

4.3	There are a number of public authorities with statutory power to apply for
communications data under Chapter II. These include:

•	Police forces

•	National Crime Agency (NCA)

•	Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs (HMRC)

•	Security Service (Mi5)

•	Secret Intelligence Service (Mi6)

•	Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ),

4.4	In addition, there are other public authorities specified under section 25(1) by order
of the Secretary of State. The additional public authorities are listed in the Regulation of
Investigatory Powers (Communications Data) Order 2010 (Statutory Instrument No. 480).

19

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

4.5	Annex A provides tabulated details of the additional public authorities with
statutory power to acquire communications data given to them by Parliament to enable
them to carry out their public responsibilities. As I will outline later in this section, around
one third of these public authorities actually acquired communications data in 2013.

4.6	The giving of lawful authority for acquiring communications data is set out in the
statute and is undertaken by a senior designated person (DP) within the public authority
acquiring it. Under Part I Chapter II and the associated Code of Practice there has to be;

•	an applicant, a person who wants to acquire the communications data for
the purpose of an investigation. The applicant has to complete an application
form. The application must provide in structured form the details required by
paragraph 3.5 of the Code of Practice.

•	a designated person (DP), who is a person holding a prescribed office in the
relevant public authority. The DP's function is to decide whether authority
to acquire the communications data should be given. Their function and
duties are described in paragraphs 3.7 to 3.14 of the Code. Except where it
is unavoidable or for reasons of urgency or security, the DP should not be
directly involved in the relevant investigation. The DP has to decide whether
it is lawfully necessary and proportionate to acquire the communications data
to which the application relates.

•	a single point of contact (SPoC) who is an accredited individual or group of
accredited individuals trained to facilitate lawful acquisition of communications
data and effective co-operation between a public authority and CSPs. Their
functions are described in paragraph 3.15 to 3.21 of the Code - see in particular
the list of functions in paragraph 3.17. These include:

◦	advising both applicants and DPs on the interpretation of RIPA 2000 Part I
Chapter II, in particular whether it is appropriate to give the authority; and

◦	providing assurance to DPs that the application is free from errors and
that granting it would be lawful under the Act.

•	a senior responsible officer (SRO) within the public authority, who is
responsible for the integrity of the process within that public authority to
acquire communications data and for compliance with Part I Chapter II of the
Act and the Code of Practice.

4.7	Essentially there are two methods for acquiring communications data - an
authorisation under section 22(3) or a notice under section 22(4). An authorisation is
effected by a person from the relevant public authority engaging in conduct to acquire
the communications data. A notice is effected by requiring a CSP to disclose the data to
the relevant public authority.

4.8	An authorisation or notice to acquire communications data must comply with the
formalities required by section 23(1) to (3) of RIPA 2000. They have a maximum period
of validity of one month (section 23(4)) and may be renewed by the same procedures
under which they were given in the first place (section 23(5)). There are provisions for
cancellation if it is no longer necessary or proportionate to acquire the communications
data.

20

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

4.9	Necessity. The mechanism by which a DP may give authority to obtain
communications data requires that person to believe that it is necessary to obtain it for
one or more of the statutory purposes set out in section 22(2) of RIPA 2000. These are:

•	in the interests of national security;

•	for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime or of preventing disorder;

•	in the interests of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom;

•	in the interests of public safety;

•	for the purpose of protecting public health;

•	for the purpose of assessing or collecting any tax, duty, levy or other imposition,
contribution or charge payable to a government department;

•	for the purpose, in an emergency, of preventing death or injury or any damage
to a person's physical or mental health, or of mitigating any injury or damage
to a person's physical or mental health; or

•	for any purpose (not falling within the above which is specified for the purpose
of this subsection by an order made by the Secretary of State - see paragraph
2.2 of the Code of Practice for these).

4.10	Parliament prescribed restrictions on the statutory purposes for which public
authorities may acquire communications data and also on the type of data that can
be acquired. For example, local authorities can only acquire service use and subscriber
information for the purpose of "preventing or detecting crime or of preventing disorder."

4.11	Annex A provides details of the types of data and the statutory purposes under
which each public authority can acquire that data in tabulated form.

4.12	Proportionality. A DP is forbidden from approving an application for
communications data unless he believes that obtaining the data in question, by the
conduct authorised or required, is proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by
so obtaining the data. Thus every application to acquire communications data has to
address proportionality explicitly.

4.13	A judgment whether it is proportionate to authorise the acquisition of
communications data requires holding a balance between (a) the necessity to engage
in potentially intrusive conduct and (b) the anticipated amount and degree of intrusion.
The judgment has to consider whether the information which is sought could reasonably
be obtained by other less intrusive means. Applications for communications data are
refused (or not applied for) where it is judged that the necessity does not outweigh the
intrusion. An application is more likely to be granted for a mobile telephone which a
suspect is known to use for criminal purposes than if the telephone may also be used by
other members of the target's family as well. That said, it is unavoidable that unconnected
and intrusive data may be acquired. Judging the likely intrusion in advance is not an
exact science.

21

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Statistics for Communications Data

4.14	Figure 4 shows the number of authorisations and notices for communications
data over the previous three years (excluding urgent oral applications). The total number
approved in 2013 was 514,608.

Figure 4 Total Notices & Authorisations under RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter II 2011-13
(excluding urgent oral)

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

0

			570,135			
	494,078				514,608	
						
						
						
						

2011	2012	2013

4.15	The urgent oral process is used to acquire communications data where there is
no time to complete the normal written process. For example, in circumstances where
there is an immediate threat to life, an urgent operational requirement relating to serious
crime or a credible threat to national security. In 2013 there were 42,293 notices and
authorisations given orally.

4.16	It is not presently possible to report the number of individuals to which the
514,608 notices and authorisations relate, but that number would be much smaller.
Public authorities often make multiple requests for communications data in the course
of a single investigation, but also make multiple requests for communications data in
relation to the same individual.

4.17	Figure 5 shows the breakdown of notices and authorisations by type of data
under section 21(4). Over half of the requirements were for subscriber information under
section 21(4)(c). The breakdown is much the same as for 2012.

4.18	My predecessor referred to the inadequacy of the statistical requirements in
the Acquisition and Disclosure of Communications Data Code of Practice in his 2012
annual report. The requirement is contained in Paragraph 6.5 of the Code of Practice, but

22

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

essentially the public authorities are only required to report the number of authorisations
and notices (written and oral) and the number of applications rejected.

Figure 5 RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter II Authorisations & Notices by Data Type

4.19	The statistical information required by the Code of Practice is flawed for the
following reasons:

•	more than 1 item of data may be requested on an authorisation or notice and
therefore the number of individual items of communications data requested
is not reported. It is likely that this figure would be higher than the number of
authorisations and notices.

•	the different workflow systems in use by public authorities have different
counting mechanisms for notices and authorisations. For example, one
public authority may request data in relation to 3 telephone numbers on
1 notice, whereas another public authority may request the same 3 items
of data on 3 separate notices. The result would be an over inflated number
of authorisations and notices for the second public authority. This makes
meaningful comparisons difficult.

•	it is a requirement for public authorities to report the number of applications
that have been rejected each calendar year, but not the number of applications
that were approved. Therefore it is difficult to establish accurately the
percentage of applications rejected.

4.20	We have consulted with the Home Office and set out the revisions and
enhancements of the statistical requirements that we believe are necessary both to
assist us with our oversight role, and, to inform the public better about the use which
public authorities make of communications data. The suggested enhancements include

23

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

requirements for:

•	the total number of applications submitted,

•	the total number of items of data requested,

•	the total items of data broken down by statutory necessity purpose (i.e.
prevent / detect crime, national security etc.)

•	the total items of data broken down by crime type or other purpose (i.e.
murder, robbery etc).

4.21	In my view the unreliability and inadequacy of the statistical requirements is a
significant problem which requires attention.

4.22	We are aware that a number of CSPs are releasing transparency figures in relation
to the communications data disclosures they make to public authorities. These statistics
should be treated with caution as again different counting mechanisms and rules are
applied which can lead to misleading comparisons. In my view the statistical information
should be collected by the public authorities, under required conventions and counting
mechanisms to ensure that it is comparable and accurate.

4.23	Taking these difficulties into account, it is with considerable caution that I have
decided to publish further statistical information in this report. The public authorities
are not mandated to provide some of this statistical information and as a result it has
not been easy, or in some cases possible, to extract the information from their systems.
The public authorities all, without question, considered my request for further statistical
information as part of their general duty under section 58(1) of RIPA to disclose or
provide to me all information I may require to carry out my function. With that in mind
they have been extremely helpful in making available what further statistical information
they could. In particular some police forces experienced significant difficulties and were
unable to provide enhanced statistics without examining each individual application. It is
not feasible to count thousands of requests manually and therefore some of the further
statistical information I publish in this report is based on samples of the overall total.

4.24	Figure 6 shows the breakdown of the 514,608 notices and authorisations by type
of public authority. It will be seen that 87.7% of these were made by police forces and law
enforcement agencies. Less than 1% were made by local authorities and 'other' public
authorities. 'Other' public authorities include regulatory bodies with statutory functions
to investigate criminal offences and smaller bodies with niche functions. This breakdown
must be treated with caution for the reasons outlined in the preceding paragraphs.

4.25	Annex B of this report provides a breakdown of the 514,608 notices and
authorisations by public authority. It is only indicative of the amount of communications
data acquired by these public authorities and must be treated with caution for the reasons
outlined in the preceding paragraphs. It is important therefore that the numbers are not
used inappropriately to produce league table comparisons.

24

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Figure 6 2013 Proportion of Authorisations & Notices under RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter II by
Public Authority Type

4.26	Finally, this year my office conducted a scoping exercise for this report with the
aim of providing some further statistical information in relation to the statutory necessity
purposes under which data is required. There has in the past been legitimate public
concern expressed in relation to the allegedly large number of statutory necessity
purposes for acquiring communications data. What my scoping exercise has shown
is that less than half a percent of all the requests were for purposes other than the
prevention and detection of crime or the prevention of disorder, national security, or in an
emergency to prevent death or injury. Figure 7 (overleaf) details this breakdown which,
although representative, must again be treated with caution for the reasons outlined in
the preceding paragraphs.

Question of Concern

4.27	There is a question of concern I have raised in public as a possibility. It will require
detailed examination which we are in the process of undertaking.

4.28	The communications data statistics given above are liable to be misleading. But
taking the 514,608 number for Part I Chapter II authorisations and notices at face value,
it seems to me to be a very large number. It has the feel of being too many. I have
accordingly asked our inspectors to take a critical look at the constituents of this bulk to
see if there might be a significant institutional overuse of the Part I Chapter II powers.
This may apply in particular to police forces and law enforcement agencies who between
them account for approaching 90% of the bulk.

25

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Figure 7 2013 Total Notices & Authorisations under RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter II by Statutory
Purpose

/ \

/ \

/ \

/ \

<0.01% - Miscarriage of
Justice

to identify person who has died or is
unable to identify themselves / to
Identify next of kin or other person

0.2%

Caveat: This chart is created to give indicative proportions of which statutory purpose the Notices given
and Authorisations granted in 2013 were for. The statistical difficulties are explained in the text. The main
point is that the contribution from a significant number of Police Forces has to be by extrapolations from a
smaller sample of forces that are able to give an accurate breakdown.

26

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

4.29	I do not consider that this is a matter that can properly be scrutinised by looking
only at individual requests, which, taken alone, may be entirely justified. It is, I think,
necessary to take a much broader view of institutional assumptions and use. Since a
very large proportion of these communications data applications come from police and
law enforcement investigations, it may be that criminal investigations generally are now
conducted with such automatic resort to communications data that applications are
made and justified as necessary and proportionate, when more emphasis is placed on
advancing the investigations with the requirements of privacy unduly subordinated.

4.30	The SPoCs have an essential role to play here in using their experience to
challenge the investigative strategy underlying the applications which they oversee. Of
course it is not their task to impede the proper progress of criminal investigations. This
particularly applies to applications which are properly urgent, for instance, if there is a
kidnapping or a life at risk. But our inspectors have found instances where applications
are marked urgent when in truth they are not, or where there has been delay in making
the application. The very fact of delay sometimes suggests that the necessity for the
application may be questionable. More generally, a proper regard for privacy could mean
that a proportion of applications currently routinely promoted as necessary could be
seen as inadequately justified.

4.31	I will report on this inquiry when my investigation is complete, but in any event
in my report for 2014.

Inspection Regime

4.32	Objectives of the inspections. The primary objectives of the inspections are to
ensure:

•	that the systems in place for acquiring communications data are sufficient for
the purposes of the Act and that all relevant records have been kept;

•	that all acquisition of communications data has been carried out lawfully and
in accordance with Part I Chapter II and its associated Code of Practice;

•	that the data acquired was necessary and proportionate to the conduct
authorised;

•	that errors are being 'reported' or 'recorded' and that the systems are reviewed
and adapted in the light of any exposed weaknesses or faults.

•	that persons engaged in the acquisition of data are adequately trained and
are aware of the relevant parts of the legislation.

4.33	Number of inspections. The 8 full time inspectors undertake the communications
data inspections. In 2013 our office conducted 75 communications data inspections
broken down as follows: 43 police force and law enforcement agency, 1 intelligence
agency, 17 local authority and 14 'other' public authority inspections. Communications

27

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

data inspections of the other two intelligence agencies happened to fall just outside the
calendar year 2013.

4.34	An additional 130 local authorities were inspected during the National Anti
Fraud Network (NAFN) inspection. NAFN continues to provide a SPoC service for local
authorities and 85% of the local authorities that reported using their powers in 2013
submit their requirements via the NAFN SPoC. Our inspection of NAFN itself showed
very good compliance and we continue to encourage all local authorities to use their
services. There are strong practical reasons for NAFN's legislative remit to be enlarged to
embrace other public authorities who are infrequent users of RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter II.
This view was shared by the Joint Parliamentary Committee which scrutinised the then
draft Communications Data Bill.

4.35	The length of each inspection depends on the type of public authority being
inspected and their communications data usage. The inspections of the larger users,
such as police forces, are conducted by at least two inspectors and take place over 3 or
4 days. The inspections of the smaller volume users are conducted by one inspector and
generally last 1 day.

4.36	Examination of systems and procedures for acquiring communications data.

Our communications data inspections are structured to ensure that key areas derived
from Part I Chapter II and the Code of Practice are scrutinised. The larger users have
bespoke workflow systems to manage their applications for communications data and
the inspectors have full access to those systems and interrogate them. A typical inspection
may include the following: •

•	a review of the action points or recommendations from the previous inspection
to check they have been implemented.

•	an audit of the information supplied by the CSPs detailing the requests
that public authorities have made for disclosure of data. This information
is compared against the applications held by the SPoC to verify that the
necessary approvals were given to acquire the data.

•	examination of individual applications for communications data to assess
whether they were necessary in the first instance and then whether the
requests met the necessity and proportionality requirements.

•	scrutinising at least one investigation or operation from start to end to assess
whether the communications data strategy and the justifications for acquiring
all of the data were proportionate.

•	examination of the urgent oral approvals to check the process was justified
and used appropriately.

•	a review of the errors reported or recorded, including checking that the
measures put in place to prevent recurrence are sufficient.

28

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

4.37	Samples. I have previously said (in relation to interception warrants) that it is
important that we scrutinise a sufficient sample of the individual applications. But, in my
view, inspecting and understanding systems is in the end more important than scrutinising
yet more individual applications. That said, it is generally feasible in the smaller public
authorities for our inspectors to examine all of the applications submitted in the period
being examined.

4.38	For the larger users, sampling must be undertaken. A survey conducted by our
office estimated that approximately 10% of the applications submitted in the period
being examined are individually scrutinised during the inspections of the larger users.
If the number of applications submitted by public authorities was one of the statistical
requirements of the Code of Practice, this estimate would be more accurate. In any event,
the inspectors randomly sample thousands of individual applications each year. It is also
worth noting the following points in relation to the random sampling:

•	it is conducted at both ends of the process - i.e. from the public authority
records and the data obtained from the CSPs;

•	if the inspectors identify an error or issue during the random sampling which
may impact on other applications, the public authority is required to identify
other applications which may contain the same error or fault. Therefore,
although random sampling may only pick up 1 error, this will lead to all error
instances of that type being investigated and reported;

•	the inspectors will continue to examine applications until they reach the
point that they are satisfied that what they have examined is an accurate
representation of the public authority's compliance.

4.39	In addition to the random sampling, where possible the Inspectors also conduct
query based searches across the workflow systems. The query based searches enable
specific areas to be tested for compliance. For example, a DP query based search relating
to a particular DP enables the inspectors to scrutinise the quality of the DPs considerations
in relation to necessity and proportionality, check that the DPs are not rubber stamping
applications and that the DPs are of the appropriate rank or level to act in that capacity.
Another example might be a query based search to identify any requests where data
has been applied for over lengthy time periods or where particularly intrusive data sets
have been acquired. This type of sampling not only enables key themes to be examined,
but also enables identified parts of a larger number of applications to be examined.
Our office has been consulting with the workflow providers to enable the examination
of a wider cross section of applications and they have been very willing to assist in this
respect.

4.40	Inspection Reports. The reports contain a review of compliance against a strict
set of baselines that derive from Part I Chapter II and the Code of Practice. They contain
formal recommendations with a requirement for the public authority to report back
within two months to say that the recommendations have been implemented, or what
progress has been made.

29

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

4.41	Inspection Findings and Recommendations. The total number of
recommendations made during our 75 communications data inspections in 2013 was 299
(Figure 8 ). A traffic light system (red, amber, green) is in place for the recommendations
to enable public authorities to prioritise the areas where remedial action is necessary:

•	Red recommendations - immediate concern - serious breaches and / or non-
compliance with Part I Chapter II or the Code of Practice.

•	Amber recommendations - non-compliance to a lesser extent; however
remedial action must still be taken in these areas as they could potentially
lead to serious breaches.

•	Green recommendations - represent good practice or areas where the
efficiency and effectiveness of the process could be improved.

This year 19 (6%) of the recommendations were red, 177 (59%) amber and 103 (35%)
green. Comparisons with previous years are difficult because the public authorities being
inspected are not the same and the number of inspections conducted each year differs.
However, in 2013 the inspectors made on average fewer recommendations per inspection
than in 2011 & 2012. The proportions of red, amber, green have remained broadly the
same.

Figure 8 Total red, amber & green recommendations resulting from communications data
inspections 2011-2013

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

2011	2012	2013

30

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Figure 9 Communications Data - 2013 Inspection Recommendations by Category

streamlining 6

training 4%

SPoC

national priority
grading scheme 4%

record keeping 5%

errors 4%

other 2%

4.42	Figure 9 shows the breakdown of the 2013 recommendations by category. Almost
70% of the recommendations fell into 4 key categories:

(1) Applicant. The majority of the recommendations in this category focused
on the necessity or proportionality justifications set out by the applicants.
The inspectors made recommendations in approximately a third of the public
authorities inspected around these two key principles as they could not be
satisfied in every instance that the applicants had sufficiently justified them.

One example might be that it was not clear how the request for data met the
section 22(2) necessity test as the criminal offences under investigation had
not been clearly set out in the application. Another example might be where
the data requested did not appear to be a proportionate response to the
matter under investigation as the applicant had failed to explain how the time
period was relevant or what they were aiming to achieve from obtaining that
data set and how that would benefit the investigation.

These issues did not affect all applications submitted by the public authority.
However they were prevalent enough across the samples examined for the
inspectors to consider that a recommendation was necessary. In such instances
the inspectors will seek further supporting documentation (such as case file,
policy logs etc.) or interview the applicant or DP to satisfy themselves that the
requests were necessary and a proportionate response.

31

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

(2)	Single Point of Contact (SPoC). The majority of the recommendations in this
category fell into two key areas; guardian and gatekeeper role and efficiency.

The SPoC has an important guardian and gatekeeper role to perform to
ensure that the public authorities act in an informed and lawful manner when
acquiring communications data. The overall picture is that the SPoC process is
a stringent safeguard. However, recommendations were made for the SPoC to
exercise their guardian and gatekeeper role more robustly in a small number
of the inspections.

In the vast majority of inspections the inspectors did see ample evidence of
SPoCs challenging applicants in cases where they believed the requirements
had not been met. This year our office obtained some further statistical
information in relation to the number of applications that the SPoCs are
returning for further development or improvement. The figure is not
complete, as only the larger users were surveyed and not all could provide the
information for reasons I have alluded to earlier in my report. It does indicate
however that on average a quarter of applications are returned by the SPoC.

This figure should also be treated with caution as we do not have the reasons
for the returns, and some may have been returned for purely administrative
reasons or because the data was not available, rather than for quality issues.
However, the return rate does provide evidence that the SPoCs are scrutinising
and challenging applications. Our inspectors also see evidence of the SPoCs
suggesting less intrusive or more effective ways that the applicant might meet
their objective.

Our inspections identified that some public authorities were experiencing
serious backlogs in dealing with applications due to a lack of staff or
inadequate systems in the SPoC. This is concerning as it could have an impact
on compliance. In addition it is also questionable whether the necessary and
proportionality justifications are still valid in cases where it has taken weeks to
process an application.

(3)	Designated Persons (DPs). The majority of the recommendations in this
category fell into three key areas; DP considerations, timeliness of approvals
and DP independence.

Overall the inspectors were satisfied that the large majority of DPs had
discharged their statutory duties responsibly. There is evidence that the DPs
are questioning the necessity and proportionality of the proposed conduct.
This year it is possible for me to report the percentage of applications
that were rejected or returned for redevelopment by the DPs in the larger
public authorities as these were included in my request for further statistical
information. In the larger users, 5% of applications were rejected or returned
for redevelopment by the DPs.

32

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

The Inspectors concluded that vast majority of DPs were completing their
written considerations to a good or satisfactory standard. Where satisfactory
our inspectors highlighted to DPs, as a matter of good practice, how they
could further improve their considerations. In a number of public authorities
the DPs were not considering the applications in proper time. For a number
of reasons it is important for applications to be considered promptly, not least
because the necessity and proportionality justifications might become invalid
in the intervening period.

Overall there is good level of objectivity and independence in the approvals
process, or, where there was not, the individuals were acting for reasons of
urgency or security. In a minority of public authorities compliance issues were
identified in this area and recommendations resulted.

(4) Notices and Authorisations. The majority of the recommendations in this
category resulted from misunderstandings in the procedures surrounding
granting authorisations and giving notices. I have previously outlined that
notices and authorisations are the two methods of conduct to acquire
communications data. In certain instances our inspectors identified that
the course of conduct approved by the DP was not in the end the course of
conduct followed by the SPoC to acquire the data, or, that the correct legal
instrument was not served on the CSP to request disclosure of the data.
These are technical breaches of Part I Chapter II and the Code of Practice
and constitute recordable errors. The reason they are not reportable errors is
because the DPs had in fact approved the acquisition of the data as necessary
and proportionate and the public authority did not receive any data the
acquisition of which had not been approved.

4.43	At the end of each inspection, the individual public authority is given an overall
rating (good, satisfactory, poor). This rating is reached by considering the total number
of recommendations made, the severity of those recommendations, and whether those
recommendations had to be carried forward because they were not achieved from the
previous inspection. On the latter point, 95% of the public authorities inspected in 2013
had fully achieved all or the majority of the recommendations emanating from their
previous inspection.

33

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Figure 10 Communications Data - Inspection Ratings 2011-2013

ro

0»

>v

ÍT3

~o

<v

4->

U

D

T3

C

o

u

t/i

c

o

-I—1

u

cu

Q.

O

0»

U)

fT3

+-«

c

0)

y

CD

Q.

100

80

60

40

20

0

2011

2012

2013

Good

Satisfactory

Poor

4.44	Figure 10 shows that overall the number of public authorities achieving a good
level of compliance has steadily risen in the last three years.

Communications Data Errors

4.45	There is provision in the Acquisition and Disclosure of Communications Data
Code of Practice (Paragraphs 6.9 - 6.25 refer) for errors. There are two categories of
errors; reportable and recordable errors.

4.46	Recordable error. In cases where an error has occurred but is identified by the
public authority or the CSP without data being acquired or disclosed wrongly, a record
will be maintained by the public authority of such occurrences. These records must be
available for our inspections. They must include details of the error and;

•	explain how the error occurred,

•	provide an indication of what steps have been, or will be, taken to ensure that
a similar error does not reoccur.

The public authority's SRO must undertake a regular review of the recording of such
errors.

4.47	Reportable error. Where communications data is acquired or disclosed wrongly
a report must be made to me within no more than five working days of the error being

34

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

discovered. (Paragraphs 6.13 & 6.17 of the Code of Practice). The error report must
include details of the error and;

•	explain how the error occurred,

•	indicate whether any unintended collateral intrusion has taken place,

•	provide an indication of what steps have been, or will be, taken to ensure that
a similar error does not reoccur.

4.48	The total number of communications data errors reported to my office in
2013 was 869. In addition a further 101 were identified during the inspections by our
inspectors making 970 reportable errors in all. Some of the 101 errors had already been
identified by the public authorities, but had been wrongly classified as recordable errors
and our inspectors picked these up when reviewing the public authorities recordable
errors register. For example, in some instances the public authorities had noticed and
corrected a mistake with the telephone number prior to serving the requirement on
the CSP, but had failed to go back to the DP to seek approval for the new number.
Technically this data was not acquired fully in accordance with the law as the DP had
not given authority for the final communications address. However it was clear in these
cases that the DP had approved the necessity and proportionality case. Others had
not been identified or realised by the public authorities themselves and this was why
they had not been reported before the inspectors identified them. 61 of the 101 errors
stemmed from just three applications that were examined during the inspections.

Figure 11 Breakdown of Errors by Cause and Responsible Party

DP did not approve
acquistion 13.2%

\

other responsible party
& cause 0.4%

incorrect type
of data 0.4%

excess data 1.5%

incorrect time /
date period 3.8%

incorrect comms
address 4.8%

applicant incorrect____

type of data 0.3%

incorrect date /
time period 4%

Key

inner pie = responsible party
outer ring = cause

DP

13.2%

CSP '
12.5%

applicant

29.8%

incorrect
communications
address 25.5%

incorrect date /
time period 18.7%

SPoC

44.1%

incorrect
type of
data 11.8

SPoC incorrect CSP 0.1%

incorrect

comms

address

13.6%

35

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

4.49	87.5% of the 970 errors were attributable to public authorities and 12.5% to CSPs.
Figure 11 (on the previous page) shows the breakdown of errors by responsible party
and cause.

4.50	Nearly half of the errors were caused by data being requested on the incorrect
communications address. Public authorities and CSPs must take action to reduce these
errors. Although I of course appreciate that everyone is human and mistakes will happen
from time to time, I do not accept that more cannot be done to reduce such errors
occurring. For example, our investigations have shown that in a large number of instances
where the applicant put the incorrect telephone number on their application form, the
telephone number was available to the applicant in electronic form and could have been
copied and pasted into the application. Had this simple step been taken, the error would
not have occurred.

4.51	A total of 970 reportable errors has to be taken in the context of all the data derived
from a total 514,608 notices and authorisations. Any reportable error is regrettable. The
majority of the 970 reportable errors had no serious consequence. I have to report that
7 errors with very serious consequences have occurred this year. Regrettably these errors
resulted in police action relating to wrongly identified individuals. In 5 of these cases the
mistakes caused a delay in the police checking on young persons who were intimating
suicide or on an address where it was believed that someone had been the victim of
a serious crime. Fortunately the police were able to identify quickly in these instances
that the persons visited were not connected with their investigation. In the remaining
instances warrants were executed at the homes of innocent account holders and this is
extremely regrettable.

4.52	All but one of these errors occurred in relation to requests for Internet Protocol
(IP) data to identify the account that was accessing the internet at a particular date and
time. There were 3 specific causes for the errors: data applied for over the wrong date or
time, the incorrect time zone conversion or a transposition error in the IP address.

4.53	One of my inspectors has conducted a full investigation into these errors. He
has held meetings with the relevant public authorities and CSPs to determine the
exact cause and ensure that steps are put in place and systems are changed to prevent
recurrence. It is clear that some of the errors could have been avoided if the details had
been transferred electronically between systems. Furthermore in some cases the error
was actually apparent on the result that was disclosed. It was unsatisfactory in these
instances that both the SPoC and the applicant failed to review the result properly and
identify the error. Had they done so the resultant police action and serious intrusion into
the privacy of innocent individuals would have been prevented. One of the roles of the
SPoC as prescribed by the Code of Practice is to assess whether the communications
data disclosed or obtained fulfils the requirement of the notice or authorisation. SPoCs
must ensure that robust measures are put in place to check results for errors before
dissemination. It is fortunate that errors with such severe consequences are very rare, but
I believe, as was the case in a number of these instances, that more should be done by
the public authorities to ensure they have sufficiently robust systems in place to prevent
occurrence.

36

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

4.54	My predecessor made the point that although there is a drive to design automated
systems to reduce the amount of double keying and resultant human error that occurs, it is
crucial for such systems to be sufficiently tested for quality to ensure they are functioning
effectively. I agree with this and would add that one technical systems error can have
wider consequences than one human error. My office is in the process of investigating
one such CSP system error which resulted in incorrect data being disclosed to a large
number of public authorities. The error in the main caused false negative results to be
provided in relation to requests for subscriber information. Accordingly no positive harm
resulted to individuals. At the time of writing this report our investigation into the cause
and impact of this error is still ongoing.

37

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Points of Note

— Communications Data

In 2013, 514,608 authorisations and notices for communications data under RIPA
2000 Part I Chapter II were approved.

214 public authorities acquired data in 2013.

87.7% of the 514,608 authorisations and notices were made by police forces and
law enforcement agencies, 11.5% by the intelligence agencies and less than 1%
by local authorities and other public authorities (regulatory bodies with statutory
functions to investigate criminal offences and smaller bodies with niche functions).

The statistical requirements in the Acquisition and Disclosure of Communications
Data Code of Practice are flawed and inadequate. Our office has consulted with
the Home Office and set out the revisions and enhancements that we believe
are necessary both to assist us with our oversight role, and, to inform the public
better about the use which public authorities make of communications data. The
unreliability and inadequacy of the statistical requirements is a significant problem
which requires attention.

In 2013 our office conducted 75 communications data inspections. Our inspections
are structured to ensure that key areas derived from Part I Chapter II and the Code
of Practice are scrutinised. Our inspectors have full access to the workflow systems
used by public authorities and interrogate them. 299 recommendations emanated
from these inspections, on average 4 recommendations for each public authority.

970 RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter II communications data errors were reported to
our office in 2013, 87.5% were attributable to public authorities and 12.5% to
Communication Service Providers (CSPs).

Almost half of the errors were caused by data being requested on the incorrect
communications address. Public authorities and CSPs must take action to reduce
this type of error. Our investigations have shown that in a large number of instances
this type of error could have been avoided.

My office is in the process of undertaking an inquiry into whether there might be an
institutional overuse of authorisations to acquire communications data under RIPA
Part I Chapter 2. I will report on this inquiry when my investigation is complete, but
in any event in my report for 2014.

38

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Section 5

Media Disclosures and Public Concerns

5.1	During the second half of 2013 (and since then) there were a series of disclosures
in the media said to be derived from Edward Snowden, who was a contractor working at
the United States (US) National Security Agency (NSA). Much of what has been reported
concerned the alleged operational practices and activities of the NSA or other agencies
in the US. Other disclosures concerned alleged UK operational activities, in particular by
or relating to GCHQ. Relevant public and parliamentary debate followed and raised a
number of legitimate questions.

5.2	Some of the media disclosures and questions concern the interception of
communications and, to that extent, I have regarded these matters as within the scope
of my statutory oversight responsibility. Obviously, if interception agencies or others are
acting unlawfully under RIPA 2000 Part I, I have a duty to report it to the Prime Minister.
Other questions may have overtones of policy, which is not perhaps within the literal
terms of my statutory function, but there are instances where the borderlines are blurred.

5.3	I have undertaken extensive investigations into the subject matter of the media
disclosures with two objectives in mind:

•	to investigate and be able to report on the lawfulness (or otherwise) of
relevant interception activities which UK interception agencies may undertake
or have undertaken.

•	to address and report on a variety of concerns which have been expressed
publicly in Parliament or in the media arising out of the media disclosures.
I have distilled my understanding of a number of those concerns and will
address them in this report.

Before doing that there are a few introductory matters.

5.4	Report to President Obama. I have read in full the Report and Recommendations
of The President's Review Group on Intelligence and Communications Technologies
"Liberty and Security in a Changing World" of 12 December 2013. The Group was
established and their review commissioned on 27 August 2013 in the wake of Snowden
disclosures. It addresses issues some of which are generically much the same as some of
those which I have addressed in this report.

5.5	The United States (US) Report necessarily addresses concern in the US with
reference to US law and statute and to US intelligence and law enforcement agencies. It
is clear that the relevant circumstances in the US are substantially different from those
in the United Kingdom. Unsurprisingly, the broad approach to safeguarding freedom
and privacy in a democratic society, and at the same time protecting national security
and preventing and detecting crime, correspond in each country. But the detailed
manifestation and application of these broad requirements diverge, such that it is not
appropriate to extrapolate recommendations from the US report into UK circumstances.
This is not to detract in any way from the value and interest of the report: rather to
acknowledge that relevant UK questions need to be addressed in a UK context.

39

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

5.6	Sensitivity requirements. There are, as any reader will understand, unavoidable
statutory restrictions on the extent to which I can lawfully publish details in relation to the
interception of communications. In particular, I am (with others) subject to the Official
Secrets Act 1989 and section 19 of RIPA 2000. Section 19 imposes a duty to keep secret
the existence, content and details of interception warrants, everything in intercepted
material and related communications data and related matters. Contravention of the
statutory provisions is a criminal offence.

5.7	These are restrictions imposed by Parliament. They mean that I am not able to
confirm or reject publicly parts of the detail said to derive from Snowden allegations. A
reader should not draw any inference one way or the other in this respect from what I
do say. However, as will I trust appear, I am able to address matters of concern in a way
which I hope will be helpful.

5.8	There is not the same specific statutory restriction in relation to communications
data, although I must be careful not to publish matters whose disclosure would be
contrary to the public interest.

5.9	The findings of my investigations into the subject matter of these disclosures are
detailed throughout this report. I consider a number of publicly expressed questions of
concern in so far as they relate to RIPA 2000 Part I matters in the following section of this
report.

40

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Section 6

Questions of Concern

In this section I seek to consider some of the legitimate questions raised in relevant
public debate which fall within my statutory review responsibility. Some of this will repeat
information I have already provided earlier in this report, but I hope that this will for
completeness assist the reader.

1.	Does the Interception of Communications Commissioner have full access
to all information from the public authorities sufficient for him to be able to
undertake his statutory functions?5

6.1.1	Yes. All those engaged in RIPA 2000 Part I matters have a statutory obligation
to disclose and provide to me all such documents and information as I may require for
the purpose of enabling me to carry out my statutory functions (section 58(1) - see also
section 18(9)).

6.1.2	This means that I have unrestricted access to full information, however sensitive,
about the activities I am required to review. I can report that I am in practice given such
unrestricted access and that all of my requests (of which there have been many) for
information and access to material or systems are responded to in full. I have encountered
no difficulty from any public authority or person in finding out anything that I consider to
be needed to enable me to perform my statutory functions. On the contrary, the public
authorities are keen that I should fully understand what I consider I need to know. They
frequently volunteer information which they consider I ought to know or which they think
would be useful.

2.	Does the Interception of Communications Commissioner have sufficient
resources to perform his statutory functions fully? And does he do so
sufficiently for public purposes?

6.2.1	Under Section 57(7) of RIPA 2000, the Secretary of State is obliged to consult
with me and to make such technical facilities available to me and, subject to Treasury
approval as to numbers, to provide me with such staff as are sufficient to ensure that I am
able properly to carry out my functions. Subject to practicalities, I have encountered no
difficulty in securing agreement to the provision of some necessary additional resources,
although at the time of writing, I await progress on others.

6.2.2	The IOCCO staff and office. My office now comprises the Chief Inspector, 8
Inspectors and 2 office staff. Details of our budget and expenditure are given in Annex

C.	There was a temporary reduction in the number of communications data and prison
inspections undertaken during the second part of 2013, because one inspector retired
during the year and the additional inspectors - see below - were not recruited or fully
trained until later in the year.

5	See House of Commons Hansard Debates for 31 October 2013 at Column 380WH

41

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

6.2.3	Additional inspectors. Soon after I was appointed, I reviewed how my office was
set up, how it worked and how we carried out our inspections. The Joint Parliamentary
Committee which scrutinized the then proposed draft Communications Data Bill6 also
recommended that my office should inspect the public authorities that acquire larger
volumes of communications data at least annually. As a result, I decided it was necessary
to increase the number of inspectors from 5 to 8. Three additional inspectors have been
recruited and are now in post, having undertaken the necessary training. We moved to
annual inspections from January 2014.

6.2.4	Communications data and prison resources. The staff resources now available
to me for communications data and prison inspection purposes are sufficient to enable
me to carry out my functions properly in those respects. The inspectors are independent,
highly skilled and experienced in the principles and detail of the acquisition and disclosure
of communications data and in interception of communications in prisons.

6.2.5	The inspectors have been recruited from a wide variety of backgrounds, and bring
with them a broad range of experience working with police forces, law enforcement
agencies, industry regulators, universities and telecommunications related private
organisations. Their experience covers everything from analytical expertise, criminal
and counter-terrorism investigations, forensic telecommunications, to training and
lecturing in both the technical and legislative aspects of communications data and covert
investigations and acting as accredited SPoCs, SROs and DPs.

6.2.6	They report in writing on each individual inspection and I read and comment on
all these reports. The reports systematically address the requirements of the statute, the
Code of Practice or relevant prison service policy and make detailed recommendations
where the inspections reveal non-compliance. The system and inspections are covered
in more detail in Sections 4 and 7 of this report.

6.2.7	Interception of communications resources. I have concluded that to undertake
my present statutory functions properly, I need one additional inspector with appropriate
technical experience. Steps are being taken to recruit such a person.

6.2.8	There are also certain respects in which the accommodation and technical
facilities available to me are not yet sufficient or appropriate. I consider that a team
of 8 communications data and prison inspectors and 3 interception inspectors (the
Chief Inspector, the additional inspector and myself), can properly undertake the
interception inspections and the other related work we currently do provided that we
have accommodation and technical facilities which enable us to work efficiently and
without interruption. The situation at present does not allow us to do so. For example,
sensitive systems to which we need access are housed in another part of the building;
there is insufficient space in our office for sensitive work to be undertaken efficiently; and
access to our office is unnecessarily difficult for our inspectors or others that we need to
help us periodically. There is also the fact that, despite being entirely independent, we are

6	Draft Communications Data Bill Session 2012/13 - HL Paper 79, HC 479 recommendation at paragraph 310.
See also The Intelligence and Security Committee's report in February 2013 "Access to communications
data by the intelligence and security agencies" Cm 8514 at paragraph 71.

42

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

accommodated on the Home Office estate, a department we inspect, and this could give
the impression that we are not entirely independent. I have raised these matters with the
Home Office and have been told they are being addressed, but not yet, so far as I can
see, to much effect.

6.2.9	With the additional resources and facilities, I presently consider that I and my office
would continue to be able to satisfy myself that the Part I interception and communications
data activities of the relevant public authorities are lawful and proportionate or, to any
extent that they may not be, to report that to the Prime Minister.

6.2.10	The scale of interception and communications data inspections. The

main public authorities who undertake interception activities or communications data
acquisition under RIPA 2000 Part I are large organisations. But my relevant responsibility
is confined to their interception and communications data activities and I regard that
as manageable. Inspections need to look efficiently at the integrity and lawfulness of
the system for applying for and granting warrants or requests for communications data
and at the systems that are in place to secure compliance with the statutory safeguards.
Individual applications and operations need to be looked at to see that they comply with
the statutory and Code of Practice requirements. We do this. In addition, this report shows
that my interception oversight has not been confined to formal inspections only - see for
instance Retention, Storage and Destruction of Intercepted Material (See paragraphs 3.48
to 3.57), and the extensive work we have undertaken to address Questions of Concern.

6.2.11	A broader resources question. There is also a question whether the scale of our
current oversight is regarded by others as sufficient for modern purposes in the national
interest. That said, I am not myself clear what a significantly enlarged oversight of RIPA
2000 Part I activities might in detail entail.

6.2.12	There is also an important question of personal responsibility. I regard myself as
personally responsible for our oversight and I personally undertake an important part of
it. Enlarged oversight would certainly bring more people to bear on it, but it would risk
bringing about a bureaucratic dilution of responsibility.

3.	Is the Interception of Communications Commissioner fully independent
of the government and the public authorities?7

6.3.1	Yes. I should regard any serious suggestion otherwise as offensive. What follows
is not to be regarded as qualification of this unequivocal assertion.

6.3.2	The office of the Interception of Communications Commissioner has existed since
the inception of the Interception of Communications Act 1985. Successive Commissioners
have always been judges or retired judges of the Court of Appeal or the former Judicial
Committee of the House of Lords. Complete independence is a required hallmark of any
judge.

7	There have been media suggestions that the oversight regime of GCHQ in particular is light and ineffective,
and that I and other commissioners have limited remit and are reluctant to challenge the agencies.

43

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

6.3.3	My predecessors' annual reports have generally been in terms which broadly
gave a clean bill of health, subject to points of detail, to the relevant activities of the
public authorities which were the subject of their review. A sceptical reader might say
or think - and some did - that parts of these reports have been bland, uncritical and
lacking in corroborative detail. I have attempted to give in this report as much relevant
detail as statutory constraints permit. It is for others to judge the extent to which this
is sufficient for public purposes. The investigations which have supported this report
have been thorough and penetrating and I have no hesitation in challenging the public
authorities wherever this has been necessary.

6.3.4	This report is entirely and without qualification the product of my own independent
judgment. It is based on information obtained independently by me or my office. I do
not set out or intend to defend, protect or promote the public authorities. If, in my
judgment, any of their activities are unlawful or disproportionate, I am obliged to say so
in this report and would do so without hesitation. To the extent that this report is in fact
supportive, that is because I have been properly satisfied that their activities are lawful
and proportionate.

4.	Should the Interception of Communications Commissioner be more
open in communicating with the public?8

6.4.1	I think this is difficult. In the second part of 2013, I declined to make any public
comment on Snowden or other matters relating to my statutory functions including a
number of requests for media interviews. I detected a degree of frustration in some
quarters that I was not prepared to make earlier statements or comments about matters
of the kind now contained in this report. The reasons for this were as follows:

6.4.2	Statutory function. My statutory function and obligation is to make reports to
the Prime Minister. Technically it is his decision what, if any, parts of my report should be
published by laying before Parliament. It is difficult, in my view, to publish material which
should be in a report to the Prime Minister in advance of such a report.

6.4.3	Complications and sensitivity. The whole subject matter with which my office
is concerned is complicated and sensitive. Fully understanding it all requires a period of
mature experience and reflection, and there was a real risk during the whole of 2013 that
I might accidentally and from inexperience overstep the proper limits of sensitivity or
make inaccurate or incomplete public statements with off the cuff oral comments.

In addition, investigating a number of aspects of Snowden related matters has required
a great deal of substantial work by me, my office and the interception agencies. The
product of this appears in this report. There are parts of this report which I could not
have written in the summer or autumn of 2013. There are still areas of review that I regard
to be work in progress and I will report on these when I have satisfied myself that a full
investigation has been completed, and not before.

8	See House of Commons Hansard Debates for 31 October 2013 at Col 380WH.

44

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

6.4.4	I trust that, frustrating though the delay may have been for some, this report will
cover, so far as I am able, the main matters of public concern.

5.	Is RIPA 2000 Part I fit for its required purpose in the developing internet
age?9

6.5.1	This is a large question. It might be recast as asking whether the internet and
technology generally has developed so greatly and rapidly that RIPA 2000 Part I now
technically permits the public authorities to intercept communications or acquire
communications data in ways which unduly invade the privacy of those who communicate
on the internet for entirely legitimate purposes. Even if the public authorities do not in
fact unduly invade users' privacy in this way, is there any material risk that they might?

The question requires separate consideration of communications data acquired under
Part I Chapter II, interception warrants issued under section 8(1) and section 8(4) of Part
I Chapter I.

6.5.2	General lack of understanding. Informed public discussion on this topic has
been hampered by an entirely understandable general lack of understanding. There is
widespread lack of informed understanding of

(a)	the structure of the statutory provisions, and

(b)	what those concerned with the operation of the statutory provisions actually
do.

6.5.3	As to (a), RIPA 2000 Part I contains provisions, some of which are difficult for
anyone to get their head round. I will try to help here. Furthermore, I am satisfied that,
despite their difficulties, these provisions are properly understood and operated by those
who are engaged in their operation. This has included successive Secretaries of State and
their relevant officials.

6.5.4	As to (b), there are sensitivity limits to the detail that I can give publicly. But I will
be as open as I may. I can be more helpful in explaining what the public authorities do
not do. I shall also consider the extent of any risk that the RIPA 2000 safeguards might
be wrongfully evaded.

6.5.5	Historical context. It is instructive to see the legislation in its historical context
and to consider what Parliament contemplated and understood before and during the
passage through Parliament of the Bill that became RIPA 2000. It is then appropriate to

9	"Can you see why it is that the public feel that when the last bit of legislation on this was passed in the
year 2000 [RIPA 2000] and technology has moved on so fast and your capabilities have developed so
hugely, it is hardly credible that the legislation is still fit for purpose for the modern world." Lord Butler
of Brockwell questioning the Director General of the Security Service at a session of the Intelligence and
Security Committee on 7 November 2013, page 19.

45

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

ask what has changed since 2000 to call in question the contemporary integrity of the
legislation.

6.5.6	The section 8(4) process in particular was not invented in RIPA 2000. It goes back
to the Interception of Communications Act 1985, which already contained in its section
3(2) to (4) and section 6 the essential features of the present section 8(4) structure. The
statutory structure has now been in place in its present form for upwards of 13 years.

6.5.7	RIPA 2000 received Royal Assent on 28th July 2000. It is of some relevance to
note that this was before the terrorist attack on the Twin Towers in the United States on
11th September 2001. RIPA 2000 was not therefore - as I understand some US legislation
was - in reaction to those events.

6.5.8	RIPA 2000 was enacted in part to bring the Interception of Communications Act
1985 up to date so that it should comply with the Human Rights Act 1998.

6.5.9	Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights provides that -

•	"Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and
his correspondence.

•	"There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of
the right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a
democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the
economic wellbeing of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
for the protection of health and morals or for the protection of the rights and
freedom of others".

6.5.10	I have described the structure of RIPA 2000 Part I for both interception of content
and acquiring communications data in Sections 3 and 4 respectively of this report. It
will be seen that these structures explicitly embrace the requirements of necessity and
proportionality and the exceptionally permitted statutory purposes, all of which derive
from Article 8. Thus if conduct under an interception warrant or authority to obtain
communications data would disproportionately intrude upon a person's privacy, it would
be unlawful to grant the warrant or give the authority. A specific judgment has to be
made in this respect by the Secretary of State or the DP for each application.

6.5.11	In short, RIPA 2000 Part I was amending legislation explicitly enacted to protect
privacy rights under Article 8 of the European Convention.

Communications data.

6.5.12	The structure of the statutory system for lawfully obtaining communications data
under RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter II and the associated Code of Practice is given in Section
4 of this report. It is important that every requirement for communications data has
been individually authorised by a process which requires a detailed written application,
scrutiny by a SPoC and consideration by an independent DP.

46

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

6.5.13	Internal authorisation. An important feature of the system for communications
data approval is that, with the exception of those for local authorities which are now
authorised by a relevant judicial authority10, it is internal to the public authority wishing
to acquire the communications data. This is in contrast with warrants authorising
interception of content which are issued by a Secretary of State. This no doubt is an
indication of a parliamentary perception when RIPA 2000 was enacted that intercepting
content was potentially more intrusive than acquiring communications data.

6.5.14	A view might be taken that giving authority to acquire communications data
internally is unsatisfactory. That view might be strengthened if the inspections which my
office undertakes revealed abuse or significant unlawful use of the Part I Chapter II powers.
Our inspections do not reveal this. The errors which are reported or uncovered by the
inspectors (see paragraphs 4.45 to 4.54) are certainly errors requiring better training or
system adjustments in places. But they are numerically very small in relation to the whole
and do not significantly detract from the integrity of this part of the statutory scheme.

6.5.15	Safeguards. Safeguards against abuse include:

•	the requirement that acquiring communications data must be necessary for
one of the Part I Chapter II statutory purposes. Acquiring it for any other
purpose would be unlawful;

•	the fact that each application has to be made individually in writing and contain
written material explaining why each element of the statutory requirements
is fulfilled;

•	the scrutiny required to be undertaken by the trained SPoCs;

•	the consideration required of the (usually independent) DP of the necessity
and proportionality of the individual applications;

•	the fact that all public authorities which acquire larger volumes of
communications data are now inspected annually by our inspectors;

•	the fact that we obtain data from CSPs to audit that their disclosures correlate
with the public authorities' approvals.

6.5.16	In 2012, there was parliamentary scrutiny of the draft Communications Data Bill
by a Joint Committee of both Houses of Parliament and by the Intelligence Services
Committee11. The Joint Committee considered whether the Part I Chapter II system for
acquiring communications data remained appropriate. I understand that, in the early
stages of its scrutiny, the Joint Committee (or some of its members) were inclined to think
that the system of internal authorisation might no longer be appropriate. However, the
Committee's eventual report gave broad approval to the existing statutory system and
in particular to the SPoC system12. I understand that this change of view (if there was

10	See section 23A of RIPA inserted by amendment by section 37 of the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012.

11	Draft Communications Data Bill Session 2012/13 - HL Paper 79, HC 479; The Intelligence and Security's
report in February 2013 "Access to communications data by the intelligence and security agencies" Cm
8514.

12	See paragraph 179 of the Report on the Draft Communications Data Bill (HC/479) "The SPoC system is an

47

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

one) resulted in part from a visit by the Committee to the SPoC unit of the Metropolitan
Police, when Committee members were able to see how the system works in practice. I
have myself visited and inspected the SPoC unit of the Metropolitan Police. I share the
Joint Committee's published view as to the integrity of the SPoC system.

6.5.17	Possibility of abuse. It is necessary to consider the possibility of intentional,
malign abuse of this Part I Chapter II system resulting in invasion of privacy.

6.5.18	I do not believe that small scale abuse of this kind can be absolutely ruled out.
It would probably have to entail a forged application by or with the criminal connivance
of an individual SPoC. I do not believe that very small scale abuse of this kind could be
guarded against absolutely except conceivably by the installation of very sophisticated
protective computer and management systems whose expense would probably not
be justified by the risk. A risk of this kind would not be eliminated by changing the
authorisation process.

6.5.19	I do not believe that a criminal conspiracy of this kind of any significant scale
would happen or go undetected in properly trained professional organisations of palpable
integrity with carefully constructed internal processes and safeguards.

6.5.20	Summary. I do not believe that RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter II now permits intrusion
into privacy to any greater extent than when the legislation was enacted in 2000. Increases
in volume have not affected the integrity of the system. Nor has the increase in volume
and sophistication of the internet. Obtaining internet communications data under
Chapter II is intrinsically the same operation as obtaining more traditional telephony
communications data. The statutory principles remain to be applied in the same way. As
has been said, RIPA 2000 is technology neutral.

Section 8(1) Interception Warrants

6.5.21	Procedure for Interception Warrants. This is provided for in sections 5 to 11 of

RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter I and the Code of Practice for the Interception of Communications.
The essential features of the application process are included in paragraphs 3.11 to 3.21
of this report.

6.5.22	General Safeguards. Section 15 of RIPA 2000 provides for important restrictions
on the use of intercepted material. It is an explicit part of my statutory functions under
section 57 to keep under review the adequacy of the safeguard arrangements which
section 15 imposes on the Secretary of State. This in the main requires a review of the
safeguarding procedures which the interception agencies operate.

integral part of the RIPA request process ... It is our view that the SPoC service should be made a statutory
requirement for all authorities which have access to communications data."

48

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

6.5.23	Dissemination. Section 15(2) in substance requires that the dissemination of
intercepted material is limited to the minimum that is necessary for authorised purposes.
The authorised purposes are those set out in section 15(4). The main such purpose is that
retaining the product of interception continues to be, or is likely to become, necessary for
one or more of the original statutory purposes. The restriction on dissemination applies
to the number of persons to whom, and the extent to which intercepted material or data
is disclosed; the extent to which it is copied and the number of copies made. Copies that
are made and retained have to be secure (section 15(5)). These restrictions have to be
considered with section 19, which (in very short summary) imposes very strict duties of
secrecy about matters relating to interception and provides criminal sanctions for breach
of those duties.

6.5.24	These restrictions on dissemination provide a strong protection against any
real intrusion into privacy where for instance lawfully intercepted material, unavoidably
obtained, is read or listened to by an analyst and immediately discarded as irrelevant.

6.5.25	Destruction. Section 15(3) is important. It provides that each copy made of any
intercepted material or related communications data is destroyed no later than when there
are no longer grounds for retaining it as necessary for any of the authorised purposes.
This has the effect of reducing substantially any risk that the product of interception
might be used indiscriminately for anything other than an authorised purpose. The
requirement to comply with section 15(3) is at the heart of our Retention, Storage and
Destruction investigation described in paragraphs 3.48 to 3.57 of this report.

6.5.26	The section 8(1) element of RIPA 2000 Part I remains, in my view, fit for purpose in
the developing internet age. It works just as properly for internet communications where
the identifier to be included in the schedule to the warrant is a known internet identifier
as it does for more traditional telephony communication.

Section 8(4) Interception warrants

6.5.27	The section 8(4) statutory system has recently given rise to understandable
concern.

6.5.28	Statutory structure. It is first necessary to explain the difficult relevant statutory
structure. I shall attempt to do this as clearly as I may. For clarity, the forms of expression
will in part be mine, not necessarily those in the statute.

6.5.29	Section 8(4) disapplies the provisions of section 8(1) and 8(2) in certain
circumstances. This means that a section 8(4) warrant does not have to name or describe
one person as the interception subject or a single set of premises as the target of

49

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

interception. It does not have to have a schedule setting out specific factors identifying
the communications to be intercepted.

6.5.30	The circumstances in which a section 8(4) warrant may be issued are that:

•	the communications to be intercepted are limited to external communications
and their related communications data;

•	external communications are communications sent or received outside the
British Islands (section 20);

•	the warrant may also comprise communications not identified in the warrant
whose interception is necessary in order to do what the warrant expressly
authorises (section 8(5));

•	in addition to the warrant, the Secretary of State has to give a certificate
describing certain of the intercepted material and certifying that the Secretary
of State considers that the examination of this described material is necessary
for one or more of the statutory purposes (section 8(4)b)), which are;

◦	in the interests of national security,

◦	for the purpose of preventing or detecting serious crime,

◦	for the purpose of safeguarding the economic well-being of the United
Kingdom.

6.5.31	The intercepted material which may be examined in consequence is limited to
that described in a certificate issued by the Secretary of State. The examination has to
be certified as necessary for a Part I Chapter I statutory purpose. Examination of material
for any other purpose would be unlawful.

6.5.32	Section 15 safeguards apply. The safeguards in section 15 which apply to all
interception warrants apply equally to section 8(4) warrants - see paragraphs 6.5.22 to
6.5.25. In particular, section 15(3) requires that each copy of intercepted material and any
related communications data is destroyed as soon as there are no longer grounds for
retaining it as necessary for any of the authorised purposes.

6.5.33	Extra safeguards for section 8(4) warrants. There are extra safeguards in
section 16 for section 8(4) warrants and certificates. Parts of section 16 are in convoluted
language and style. I will summarise the relevant bits as clearly as I may.

6.5.34	The section 8(4) intercepted material may only be examined to the extent that its
examination:

•	has been certified as necessary for a Part I Chapter I statutory purpose, and

•	does not relate to the content of communications of an individual who is
known to be for the time being in the British Islands.

6.5.35	Thus a section 8(4) warrant does not generally permit communications of

50

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

someone in the British Islands to be selected for examination. This is, however, qualified
to a limited extent by sections 16(3) and 16(5).

6.5.36	Section 16(3) permits the examination of material acquired under a section 8(4)
warrant relating to the communications of a person within the British Islands if the
Secretary of State has certified for "the individual in question" that its examination is
necessary for a statutory purposes in relation to a specific period of not more than 6
months for national security purpose or 3 months for serious crime or economic well-
being. Since this certificate has to relate to an individual, it is generally equivalent to a
section 8(1) warrant.

6.5.37	Section 16(4) and (5) have the effect that material acquired under a section 8(4)
warrant for a person who is within the British Islands may be examined for a very short
period upon the written authorisation of a senior official where the person was believed
to be abroad but it has just been discovered that he or she has in fact entered the British
Islands. This will enable a section 8(1) warrant or section 16(3) certificate for that person
to be duly applied for without losing what could be essential intelligence.

6.5.38	What this all boils down to is that

•	a section 8(4) warrant permits the interception of generally described (but not
indiscriminate) external communications.

•	this may only be lawfully examined if it is within a description certified by the
Secretary of State as necessary for a statutory purpose.

•	the selection for examination may not be referable to the communications
of an individual who is known to be for the time being in the British Islands
unless he or she is the subject of an individual authorisation under section
16(3) or (5)13.

•	the section 8(4) structure does not permit random trawling of communications.
This would be unlawful. It only permits a search for communications referable
to individuals the examination of whose communications are certified as
necessary for a statutory purpose.

13	This analysis of what is now section 16 of RIPA 2000 was in substance explained in Parliament during a
House of Lords debate on the bill which became RIPA 2000. At that stage, what is now section 16 was
clause 15 in the bill. Lord Bassam of Brighton, responding to an opposition amendment (subsequently
withdrawn) essentially probing whether clause 8(4) would permit "Orwellian trawling", said at Hansard
House of Lords Debates for 12 July 2000 at column 323:

"It is still the intention that Clause 8(4) warrants should be aimed at external communications. Clause 8(5)
limits such a warrant to authorising the interception of external communications together with whatever
other conduct is necessary to achieve that external interception. Whenever such a warrant is signed, the
Secretary of State must be convinced that the conduct it will authorise as a whole is proportionate--my
favourite word--to the objects to be achieved. His decision to sign will be overseen by the interception of
communications commissioner.

"The next layer of protection is the certificate. Anything that is not within the terms of the certificate may
be intercepted but cannot be read, looked at or listened to by any person. Beyond that are the safeguards
set out in subsection (2) of Clause 15. Except in the special circumstances set out in later subsections, or
if there is an "overlapping" Clause 8(1) warrant, selection may not use factors which are referable to an
individual known to be for the time being in the British Islands."

51

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

6.5.39	How section 8(4) is in fact operated. I have examined in detail the way in which
the interception agencies in fact operate under section 8(4) warrants. This is sensitive,
but I can give some general indications.

6.5.40	Any significant volume of digital data is literally useless unless its volume is first
reduced by filtering. What is filtered out at this stage is immediately discarded and
ceases to be available. What remains after filtering (if anything) will be material which is
strongly likely to include individual communications which may properly and lawfully be
examined under the section 8(4) process. Examination is then effected by search criteria
constructed to comply with the section 8(4) process.

6.5.41	It is a matter of judgment whether a process of this kind has any significant risk
of undue invasion of privacy. My own judgment is that it does not, for reasons which I
will explain.

6.5.42	If I were to conclude that the section 8(4) procedure is in fact operated unlawfully
so as to give rise to improper invasion of privacy, it would unquestionably be my duty to
report it to the Prime Minister under section 58(2) of RIPA 2000. I do not so conclude.
There are some instances, outlined in the paragraph 3.64 of this report, where the section
16 safeguards have not been fully complied with. These instances do not materially
detract from my general conclusion.

6.5.43	The reasons for my judgment that the section 8(4) process does not have a
significant risk of undue invasion of privacy are as follows: •

•	it cannot operate lawfully other than for a statutory purpose. Indiscriminate
trawling is not a statutory purpose;

•	it cannot operate lawfully other than pursuant to a warrant and one or more
certificates issued by the Secretary of State;

•	the Secretaries of State who sign warrants and give certificates are well familiar
with the process; well able to judge by means of the written applications
whether to grant or refuse the necessary permissions; and well supported
by experienced senior officials who are independent from the interception
agencies making the applications;

•	if a warrant is up for renewal, the Secretary of State is informed in writing of
the intelligence use the interception warrant has produced in the preceding
period. Certificates are regularly reviewed and subject to modification by the
Secretary of State;

•	examination of intercepted material has to be in accordance with the certificate
such that indiscriminate trawling is unlawful;

•	with the exception of individuals under section 16(3) (or for very short periods
under section 16(5)), examination of intercepted material may not be referable
to an individual who is in the British Islands;

•	examination of material under section 16(3) referable to the communications

52

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

of an individual who is within the British Islands is limited by a process
equivalent to that for a section 8(1) warrant;

•	the examination of the intercepted material is effected by search criteria
constructed to comply with the section 8(4) process;

•	the process is subject to Retention, Storage and Destruction policies and
procedures which I have examined in detail and which I consider in paragraphs
3.48 to 3.57 of this report.

6.5.44	Risk of misuse? It is legitimate to ask what risks are there that this process might
miscarry; or what features of it might be seen as unacceptable potential invasion of the
privacy of individuals in whom the interception agencies have no legitimate interest. As
to which:

•	I have personally undertaken a detailed investigation of the statutory, technical
and practical operation of section 8(4) warrants;

•	I have confirmed that the interception agencies understanding of the relevant
statutory and Code of Practice requirements coincides with mine as expressed
in this report;

•	I have confirmed that the interception agencies technical and practical
operation of the section 8(4) process is designed to comply with the statutory
and Code of Practice requirements;

•	I have also made visits to and had meetings with a number of CSPs to discuss
and, so far as I am able, understand the technicalities of their implementation
of section 8(4) warrants under section 11 of RIPA 2000. The technicalities are
complicated and sophisticated but I believe that I have sufficiently understood
their principles at least for present purposes.

Decision of the Investigatory Powers Tribunal about section 8(4).

6.5.45	On 9th December 2004, the Investigatory Powers Tribunal (IPT), in Open Rulings
on Preliminary Issues of Law, considered the lawful integrity of section 8(4) of RIPA 2000.
I have included an extended summary of these Rulings in Appendix 1 to this report. The
general tenor of the Rulings is to endorse the structural integrity in law of the section
8(4) procedure including the principle of a filtering process to reduce and make individual
selections from generalised interception material.

6.5.46	In the light of this IPT decision, it is, I think, pertinent to ask what has changed
since 2000 or 2004 so that a statutory procedure which was re-enacted in 2000, and
whose integrity was judged to be intact in 2004, may now have become inadequate and
outdated.

6.5.47	Certainly the use of the internet has expanded in volume and sophistication.
Investigatory techniques are no doubt more sophisticated then they were. But I do not

53

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

see that either of these by themselves affect the integrity of the statutory structure as
supplemented by the Code of Practice.

6.5.48	Privacy and Human Rights. As I have already noted, one of the main reasons
for Parliament enacting RIPA 2000 was to make it compliant with the Human Rights
Act 1998. Thus RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter I, and the section 8(4) procedures in particular,
were enacted as being compliant with the privacy rights in Article 8 of the Convention.
There is no reason internal to the statute to suppose that they are any less compliant
as statutory provisions now than they were in 2000. No doubt Parliament addressed
particular human rights privacy considerations as well in 2000, and it is appropriate to
re-address such considerations now with reference to section 8(4).

6.5.49	Since the section 8(4) structure re-enacted in 2000 explicitly enables the
generalised initial interception of what at the point of interception is (relatively) unfiltered
material, the following questions might arise:

(a)	is it in general necessary and proportionate to warrant the initial interception of
this kind and volume of material?

(b)	are there other reasonable less intrusive means of obtaining the information
which it is considered necessary to obtain - this is a consideration which section
5(4) of RIPA 2000 explicitly requires the Secretary of State to take into account?

(c)	is there a risk that a process of generalised initial interception would unavoidably
also initially intercept some internal communications?

6.5.50	The question at (a) above cannot be properly answered as an isolated question.
The necessity and proportionality of the initial interception has to be looked at in the
context of:

•	what then happens to the interception material;

•	to what extent may it be lawfully examined;

•	for how long and for what purpose is it retained before being deleted;

•	what safeguards are imposed by the statute; and

•	are the safeguards adhered to?

I have considered each of these matters in the course of this report.

6.5.51	As to (b) above, I am satisfied that at present there are no other reasonable means
that would enable the interception agencies to have access to external communications
which the Secretary of State judges it is necessary for them to obtain for a statutory
purpose under the section 8(4) procedure. This is a sensitive matter of considerable
technical complexity which I have investigated in detail.

6.5.52	As to (c) above, I am satisfied from extensive practical and technical information
provided to me that it is not at the moment technically feasible to intercept external

54

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

communications without a risk that some internal communications may also be initially
intercepted. This was contemplated and legitimised by section 5(6)(a) of RIPA 2000 which
embraces

"all such conduct (including the interception of communications not identified
by the warrant) as it is necessary to undertake in order to do what is expressly
authorised or required by the warrant".

6.5.53	Thus the unintended but unavoidable initial interception of some internal
communications under a section 8(4) warrant is lawful. Reference to Hansard House of
Lords Debates for 12th July 2000 shows that this was well appreciated in Parliament when
the bill which became RIPA 2000 was going through parliament14.

6.5.54	However, the extent to which this material, lawfully intercepted, may be lawfully
examined is strictly limited by the safeguards in section 16 - see paragraphs 6.5.33 6.5.37
of this report. And in any event my investigations indicate that the volume of internal
communications lawfully intercepted is likely to be an extremely small percentage of the
totality of internal communications and of the total available to an interception agency
under a section 8(4) warrant.

6.5.55	Summary. The upshot of all this is that I do not consider that RIPA 2000 Part
I Chapter I, and in particular the section 8(4) process has become unfit for purpose in
the developing internet age. There are certainly problems for anyone unfamiliar with
the statutory structure in getting a clear understanding of what the statute permits,
and conversely what it forbids. There are sensitivity problems which mean that the
public cannot (and should not) find out the detail of interception operations which the
interception agencies may undertake. But these problems are not new or recent. They
have only been highlighted by recent events.

6.5.56	It is ultimately a matter of policy whether the interception agencies, duly authorised
under RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter I and subject to its safeguards, should continue to be
enabled to intercept external communications, so far as they are lawfully and technically
able, in order to assist their functions of protecting the nation and its citizens from
terrorist attack, cyber attack, serious crime and so forth. If the policy answer to that
question is yes (which I personally should have thought was obvious), the questions then
are whether:

14	Lord Bassam of Brighton, responding to an opposition amendment (subsequently withdrawn) essentially
probing whether clause 8(4) would permit "Orwellian trawling", said at column 323:

"It is just not possible to ensure that only external communications are intercepted. That is because modern
communications are often routed in ways that are not all intuitively obvious. Noble Lords who have
contributed to the debate understand that an internal communication--say, a message from London to
Birmingham--may be handled on its journey by Internet service providers in, perhaps, two different countries
outside the United Kingdom. We understand that. The communication might therefore be found on a link
between those two foreign countries. Such a link should clearly be treated as external, yet it would contain
at least this one internal communication. There is no way of filtering that out without intercepting the whole
link, including the internal communication."

55

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

(a)	the present safeguards are sufficient to assure the public that their legitimate
privacy is not impaired;

(b)	the present structure should be strengthened for the greater protection of
privacy.

6.5.57	I leave these questions for others to consider as matters of policy in the light of
this report. I would only emphasise here that question (b) above is heavily overlain by
matters of sensitive technical possibility, which any changes would need to accommodate.

6.5.58	Furthermore, it is, I believe, beyond question that technological developments
relating to the internet may make the public authorities interception and communications
data legitimate activities in the public interest more difficult. Recent commentary has
tended towards confining the public authorities interception and communications data
powers and activities. There is a legitimate policy question whether those capabilities
might not need to be enhanced in the national interest. Present public sentiment
might not favour that, and changes would obviously need to be very carefully weighed
with interests of privacy. But perhaps that policy question should not be completely
overlooked.

6.	Do the interception agencies misuse their powers under RIPA 2000 Part I
Chapter I to engage in random mass intrusion into the private affairs of law
abiding UK citizens who have no actual or reasonably suspected involvement
in terrorism or serious crime? If the answer to that question is no, is there
any material risk that they or somebody might be able to intrude in this
way?15

6.6.1	I have to a large extent covered this in the previous section of this report.

6.6.2	The answer to the first of the two questions is emphatically no. The interception
agencies do not engage in indiscriminate random mass intrusion by misusing their
powers under RIPA 2000 Part I. It would be comprehensively unlawful if they did. I
should be required to report it to the Prime Minister. I am personally confident from the
work I have undertaken throughout 2013 and to date that no such report is required.

6.6.3	In the real world, intrusion in this context into the privacy of innocent persons
would require sentient examination of individuals' communications. The legislation only
permits this to the extent that it is properly authorised under the statutory structure
which I have described and for the necessity purposes which the legislation permits.
None of this is 'random' or 'mass' and none of it is directed to intrude into the private
affairs of law abiding UK citizens.

15	There have been explicit media suggestions of a surveillance system enabling the state to capture
indiscriminately data relating to law abiding citizens; of mass snooping on private communications; of
massive unwarranted surveillance that is insecure and unaccountable; and questions whether intrusion
only occurs when globally collected data is actually searched.

56

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

6.6.4	There will almost always be two parties to a relevant communication. They may
perhaps each be properly targeted serious criminals. As often as not, only one of them
is, or perhaps neither if, for instance, the communications device is used by others as well
as the target. You cannot tell in advance which communications for your serious criminal
will be of intelligence interest and which may not. Those which are not may well be
theoretically intrusive. Even those which are of intelligence interest may be to an extent
intrusive.

6.6.5	It is important that my inspections, and those carried out by our inspectors, look
at a sufficient selection of individual applications to see that they are fully and properly
drafted and authorised in accordance with the statute and the Code of Practice. This
particularly applies to the proportionality sections. But my view, as I have said, is that
repetitious inspections of more and more individual applications is eventually less helpful
than looking at systems. As to which, there is a number of considerations as follows:

•	individual analysts may have to listen to or look at on screen whatever comes
before them, be it relevant to an investigation or not. They are experienced
and trained to identify quickly and isolate items of legitimate intelligence
interest and to deal with them appropriately;

•	material which is of no intelligence interest is very quickly passed over, as often
as not without being read or listened to. In many systems it is immediately
marked for deletion. The deletion will then very soon happen, in many
systems automatically;

•	meanwhile the analyst, being only human and having a job to do, will have
forgotten (if he or she ever took it in) what the irrelevant communication
contained. I have sat next to analysts and heard or seen this happening;

•	any assessment of the degree of real intrusion should appreciate that this is
what inevitably happens on the ground. The active intrusion is insignificant;

•	the question never arises, but could in theory be asked, whether it might be
an offence under section 19 of RIPA 2000 for an analyst to disclose to anyone
the contents of an irrelevant communication marked for deletion;

•	deleted material necessarily cannot be searched at all, let alone intrusively;

•	conversely it is only stored material that is available for subsequent potential
intrusive investigations.

6.6.6	It is for these reasons that I undertook the investigation of the Retention, Storage
and Destruction of intercepted material and related communications data in all of the
interception agencies with statutory powers to apply for interception warrants under
RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter I (See paragraphs 3.48 to 3.57 of this report).

6.6.7	One significant apparent difference between the interception regime under Part I
Chapter I and the communications data regime under Part I Chapter II is that there is no
explicit statutory destruction provision in Part I Chapter II equivalent to that in section
15(3) for intercepted material. Section 15(3) requires the destruction of intercepted
material and related communications data as soon as there are no longer grounds for
retaining them as necessary for any of the authorised purposes. I nevertheless take

57

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

the provisional view in principle under human rights jurisprudence that communications
data should not be held available for any longer period than it is properly required for an
authorised statutory purpose.

6.6.8	There have been rumbling publicly expressed undertones that the interception
agencies may be operating the section 8(4) interception procedures unlawfully or to the
outer limits of legality, so as to produce disproportionate invasion or potential invasion
of people's privacy. My clear independent judgment is that this is simply not so, subject
to three caveats. Only the third of these should be seen (subject to my further inquiry) as
suggesting the possibility of some structural or other reconsideration.

The three caveats are as follows:

(1)	my detailed investigation of the Retention, Storage and Destruction of
intercepted material and related communications data (See paragraphs
3.48 to 3.57) has unearthed some instances where I conclude further work
needs to be done for me to be fully satisfied that some retention periods
are not unduly long. This is a general statement referable to several of the
interception agencies not specifically directed at the operation of section 8(4)
warrants. The proper length of a retention period under section 15(3) - "as
soon as there are no longer grounds for retaining it as necessary for any of
the authorised purposes" - is not always clear cut and may be amenable to
differing judgments.

(2)	the Errors Section of this report has instances where interception has been
unintentionally undertaken in error. Every error is regrettable and some of them
constitute unintentional unlawfulness. But I consider that the interception
errors may properly be seen as largely isolated and fringe problems which, so
far as I am aware, have not resulted in any material actual invasion of privacy.
[The same is not entirely true of a small handful of communications data
errors which are noted in paragraphs 4.51 to 4.53 of this report].

(3)	I need to undertake further detailed investigation into the actual application
of individual selection criteria from stored selected material initially derived
from section 8(4) interception. I have had this fully explained and then
demonstrated to me. But I am currently short of sufficient detailed material
necessary to make a full structural analysis and assessment of this internal
process. Time has not permitted me to undertake this inquiry before writing
this report.

6.6.9	My present provisional approach to this last point is as follows:

•	individual interception under a section 8(1) warrant is appropriately authorised
by a Secretary of State's judgment upon properly structured material;

•	the individual acquisition of communications data under RIPA 2000 Part
I Chapter II is appropriately authorised by a largely independent DP upon
properly structured material. The process is internal to the public authority
acquiring the data (save for local authorities who must go to a relevant judicial

58

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

authority), but is closely prescribed by the Code of Practice;

•	the application of individual selection criteria initially derived from a section
8(4) interception warrant is also determined internally to the interception
agency by properly structured internal procedures, backed up by independent
audit arrangements;

•	convinced, as I am, that the main structure for section 8(4) warrants has
statutory structural integrity and that it is in fact operated lawfully and so
as to avoid disproportionate intrusion into privacy, I nevertheless need to
investigate further the breadth and depth of the internal procedures that are
being applied to ensure that they are sufficiently strong in all respects.

6.6.10	Risk of unlawful intrusion? The second question under this main heading as to
whether there is any real risk that the interception agencies or somebody might be able
to intrude unlawfully into people's privacy needs further analysis. Conceivably possible
candidates for effecting such unlawful intrusion could be:

•	the Government;

•	one or more of the interception agencies themselves;

•	one or more rogue individuals within the interception agencies; or

•	by means of aggressive external cyber attack.

6.6.11	The Government. There is, in my judgment, no risk that the Government
would or could require the interception agencies to undertake activity which would be
unlawful under RIPA 2000 Part I. I ask the question only to dismiss it, but also because I
understand that relevant questionable activity may have happened in the United States
in the 1970's16.

6.6.12	Successive Secretaries of State have undertaken their statutory functions of
granting warrants under RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter I conscientiously, with complete
integrity in the public interest, and without any partisan motive which the lawful subject
matter would never embrace anyway.

6.6.13	Secretaries of State do not initiate applications for interception warrants. They
respond to applications from the interception agencies which are intended to support
their operations. Some of these operations are in general response to intelligence policy
priorities of the Joint Intelligence Committee, but these cannot and do not translate into
interception applications which are outside the Chapter I statutory necessity purposes.

6.6.14 The Interception Agencies. Unlawful and unwarranted intercept intrusion
of any kind, let alone "massive unwarranted surveillance", is not and, in my judgment
could not be carried out institutionally within the interception agencies themselves. The
interception agencies and all their staff are quite well aware of the lawful limits of their
powers. Any form of massive unwarranted intercept intrusion would as a minimum
require a significant unlawful internal conspiracy which would never go undetected,

16	See pages 54 to 63 of the Report to President Obama discussed in paragraphs 5.4 and 5.5 of this report.

59

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

let alone be concealed from external observation or inspection. It would, for instance,
require one or more forged interception warrants or certificates and probably unlawful
complicity by CSPs. I reckon that the interception agencies and the CSPs would rightly
feel offended that the question needs to be asked.

6.6.15	At a more detailed level, possible unwarranted intrusion cannot happen in the
abstract. As I have said, a large body of unfiltered data is useless. An individual or
group of individuals cannot possibly have sentient access to a single minute's amount
of unfiltered UK communications, let alone communications over any longer period. A
progressively selected tiny part of this is needed to make possible any examination by a
person upon specific individualised inquiry. This is precisely what sections 8(4) and 16 of
RIPA 2000 Part I permit. This, and only this, is what happens.

6.6.16	No one sits in front of a computer screen aimlessly trawling through unselected
intercepted material. All searches are for a specific authorised purpose. Any more generic
computerised search of stored material for intrusive purposes would be unlawful. But
any even theoretical possibility of this is heavily moderated by the facts that:

•	such material as is stored is required by section 15(3) to be deleted as soon
as there are no longer grounds for retaining it as necessary for any of the
authorised purposes;

•	the filter process necessarily discards large quantities of material which are
irrelevant to the interception agencies lawful activities. What remains for
any period before it is destroyed is scarcely amenable to mass intrusive
surveillance;

•	I have carried out the detailed survey of the Retention, Storage and Destruction
arrangements of all the interception agencies with powers to apply for
interception warrants (see paragraphs 3.48 to 3.57 of this report) with the
results which I have described.

6.6.17	A rogue individual or small group. There remains the conceivable, but highly
improbable, possibility of small scale unauthorised and unlawful intrusion within the
interception agencies by a malign rogue individual or small group. I need to do further
detailed research here (see paragraphs 6.6.8 to 6.6.9) and will report in due course, not
least to give assurance to the individuals who operate these systems that the work that
they do has proper and sufficient protective safeguards.

6.6.18	External cyber attack. This is conceivable, but not within my direct sphere of
responsibility or experience. In so far as it might be technically possible - which I simply
do not know - I am sure that the interception agencies take proper and appropriate
precautions.

60

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

7.	How can the public feel comfortable in the matter of interception when
everything is secret and the public does not know and cannot find out what
the interception agencies are doing?

6.7.1	This is an entirely legitimate question. As I have said there are two problems.

6.7.2	First, RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter I is difficult legislation and a reader's eyes glaze
over before reaching the end of section 1, that is, if the reader ever starts. The Codes of
Practice are more accessible and contain a fairly readable account of the requirements
and constraints.

6.7.3	I have given in this report a detailed summary and analysis of the relevant
legislation which is intended to be accessible. It sets out to show what the statute permits
and what is does not permit. I have tried to be helpful and to set right misunderstandings
where I reckon these exist. If the informed public can understand the main shape of the
legislation, that should supply part of the comfort. The main shape of the legislation is
that it is derived from and fully compliant with Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;
and that interception cannot lawfully take place except by procedures and subject to
safeguards designed to achieve that compliance. The starting point is that interception
can only be lawfully undertaken for one of the statutory purposes derived from Article 8.

6.7.4	Second, although there is no escaping the statutory constraints on publishing
sensitive details about what the interception agencies do in detail, their interception
activities are directed, and only directed, in the national interest towards the statutory
necessity purposes. I have been able to publish where possible details of what the
interception agencies do not do, which I hope may help. In the end, there has to be a fair
degree of trust, both of the interception agencies themselves, and of the extent to which
I and my office are properly able to review the interception agencies RIPA 2000 Part I
activities in the public interest.

6.7.5	I am, however, personally quite clear that any member of the public who does not
associate with potential terrorists or serious criminals or individuals who are potentially
involved in actions which could raise national security issues for the UK can be assured that
none of the interception agencies which I inspect has the slightest interest in examining
their emails, their phone or postal communications or their use of the internet, and they
do not do so to any extent which could reasonably be regarded as significant.

61

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

8.	Do British intelligence agencies receive from US agencies intercept
material about British citizens which could not lawfully be acquired by
intercept in the UK and vice versa and thereby circumvent domestic oversight
regimes?

6.8.1	No. I have investigated the facts relevant to the allegations that have been
published, as to the details of which I am unable to comment publicly. However, the
principles that I have applied in reaching this conclusion are as follows.

6.8.2	An intelligence agency in country A is entitled to share intelligence with an
intelligence agency in country B if:

(i)	the intelligence is lawfully acquired in country A; and

(ii)	it is lawful in country A for its intelligence agency to share the intelligence
with the intelligence agency in country B; and

(iii)	it is lawful in country B for its intelligence agency to receive the intelligence;
and for good measure

(iv)	it would have been lawful for the intelligence agency in country B to acquire
the intelligence in country B, if it had been available for lawful acquisition in
that country.

6.8.3	As to (i) and (ii) and generally, I have no expertise in US law and have not personally
investigated so much of it as might be relevant. I have however received appropriate
assurances in this respect.

6.8.4	As to (ii), if country A is the UK, I have had particular regard to section 15(2)
of RIPA 2000 which strictly limits the lawful dissemination of intercept material to the
minimum that is necessary for the authorised purposes.

6.8.5	As to (iii), I know of no principle that an intelligence agency is disentitled from
receiving intelligence information offered by a third party which a third party lawfully has,
provided that its receipt is within the established statutory function of the intelligence
agency, as to which see the Intelligence Services Act 1994. It happens all the time.

6.8.6	As to (iv), information lawfully obtained by interception abroad is not necessarily
available by interception to an interception agency here. In many cases it will not be
available. If it is to be lawfully provided from abroad, it is sometimes appropriate for the
interception agencies to apply explicitly by analogy the RIPA 2000 Part I principles of
necessity and proportionality to its receipt here even though RIPA 2000 Part I does not
strictly apply, because the interception did not take place in the UK by an UK agency. This
is responsibly done in a number of appropriate circumstances by various of the agencies,
and I am asked to review the consequent arrangements, although this may not be within
my statutory remit.

62

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Points of Note

Questions of Concern

I have full and unrestricted access to all information from public authorities,
however sensitive, sufficient for me to be able to undertake my statutory functions.

I am fully independent of the Government and the public authorities which I inspect.

I have (or in one respect soon will have) enough staff to enable me to perform
my statutory functions properly, provided that the current accommodation and
technical facilities are enhanced in identified respects.

I have considered in detail the large question whether RIPA 2000 Part I remains
fit for its required purpose in the developing internet age. I have concluded that
it is as fit for purpose as it was when it was enacted. I need to carry out further
investigations into one aspect of the operation of Section 8(4).

Public authorities do not misuse their powers under RIPA Part I to engage in
random mass intrusion into the private affairs of law abiding UK citizens. It would
be comprehensively unlawful if they did. I have considered whether there is a
material risk that unlawful intrusion might occur in the operation of Section 8(4).
Subject to some further investigation, I conclude there is no material risk.

I am quite clear that any member of the public who does not associate with potential
terrorists or serious criminals or individuals who are potentially involved in actions
which could raise national security issues for the UK can be assured that none of
the interception agencies which I inspect has the slightest interest in examining
their emails, their phone or postal communications or their use of the internet, and
they do not do so to any extent which could reasonably be regarded as significant.

British intelligence agencies do not circumvent domestic oversight regimes by
receiving from US agencies intercept material about British citizens which could
not lawfully be acquired by intercept in the UK.

63

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Section 7
Prisons

7.1	In this section I shall provide an outline of the legislation governing the
interception of prisoners' communications, give details of our prison inspection regime
and summarise the key findings from our inspections.

Background

7.2	I have continued to provide non-statutory oversight of the interception of
communications in prisons in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, as did my predecessors.
I do not currently provide any oversight for prisons in Scotland. It would be preferable, in
my view, if prison oversight was formalised as a statutory function.

7.3	This non statutory oversight of prisons in England and Wales commenced in 2002
at the request of the then Home Secretary. IOCCO were invited to undertake inspections
of the Northern Ireland Prisons by the then Director General of Northern Ireland Prisons
in 2008.

7.4	In England and Wales Function 4 of the National Security Framework (NSF)
governs the procedures for the interception of prisoners' communications (telephone
calls and mail). There are also various Prison Service Instructions (PSIs) (such as 08/2009,
52/2010, 49/2011, 56/2011, 24/2012, 10/2013) that impact on this area. The numerous
policy documents are fragmented and contradictory in places and this makes it difficult
for the prisons themselves to understand the requirements fully and for our inspectors
to conduct the oversight. Our inspectors have, on more than one occasion, come across
new PSIs whilst actually inspecting prisons. This is problematic as in these instances
we had not had the opportunity to align our inspection baselines to the new policy.
Concerns have been raised with the Security Group, National Offender Management
Service (NOMS) as to why we were not notified in advance of the implementation dates
of PSIs that affect the arrangements for the interception of prisoners' communications.

7.5	NOMS is working towards implementing an Interception PSI and it was our
understanding that this PSI would replace all other PSIs. It is not clear whether this is
still the intention. In our view it would be very confusing for the establishments who
are trying to introduce systems and procedures to comply with the various policies if
there are numerous PSIs covering this activity and a lack of clarity over which PSI takes
precedence.

7.6	Last year my predecessor reported that NOMS had not formally introduced the
interception risk assessment template that was designed in 2011. So far as I am aware,
there has again been no progress here. Our inspectors have found themselves in a difficult
position whereby they are effectively being asked to promote the use of templates which
have not been formally ratified.

7.7	NOMS must get to grips with these issues and put in place a clear defined policy
and risk assessment documents for the interception of prisoners' communications.

65

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

7.8	With regard to the Northern Ireland prisons it has been accepted practice that
where Instructions to Governors are absent or deemed to be out of date the Northern
Ireland Prison Service would accept our recommendations based on PSIs issued to
establishments in England and Wales. This arrangement is far from ideal and I have
recommended that the Northern Ireland Prison Service should be aiming to issue a
comprehensive Instruction to Governors to supplement the Northern Ireland Prison
Rules in relation to the interception of prisoners' communications.

Authorisations to Intercept Prisoners Communications

7.9	Necessity. A Governor may make arrangements to intercept a prisoner's (or class
of prisoners) communications if he believes that it is necessary for one of the purposes
set out in Prison Rules 35A(4) (or Northern Ireland Prison Service Prison Rules 68A(4)).
These are:

•	the interests of national security;

•	the prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of crime;

•	the interests of public safety;

•	securing or maintaining prison security or good order and discipline in prison;

•	the protection of health or morals; or

•	the protection of the rights and freedoms of any person.

7.10	Proportionality. A Governor may only give authority to intercept a prisoner's (or
class of prisoners) communications if he believes the conduct authorised is proportionate
to what is sought to be achieved by that conduct.

7.11	Types of monitoring. Interception is mandatory in some cases, for example, high
risk or exceptionally high risk Category A prisoners and prisoners on the Escape list. It
is often necessary to monitor prisoners for offence related purposes, for example, those
who have been convicted of sexual or harassment offences or who pose a significant
risk to children. All other prisoners may be subject to monitoring where the Governor
believes that it is necessary and proportionate for one of the purposes set out in Prison
Rules. Monitoring is conducted on the basis of an interception risk assessment and an
authorisation signed by the Governor.

7.12	Communications which are subject to legal privilege are protected and there are
also special arrangements in place for dealing with confidential matters, such as contact
with the Samaritans or a prisoner's constituency MP.

66

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Inspection Regime

7.13	Objectives of Inspections. The primary objectives of our inspections are to
ensure that:

•	All interception is carried out lawfully and in accordance with the Human
Rights Act (HRA) and the Prison Rules made under the Prison Act 1952 or
section 13 of the Prison Act (Northern Ireland) 1953;

•	All prisons are fully discharging their responsibilities to inform the prisoners
that their communications may be subject to interception;

•	There is consistency in the approach to interception work in prisons;

•	The proper authorisations and risk assessments are in place to support the
monitoring of prisoners telephone calls and mail;

•	Appropriate measures are being afforded to the retention, storage and
destruction of intercept product.

7.14	Number of inspections. The 8 full time inspectors undertake the prison
inspections. In 2013 our office conducted 88 prison inspections which equates to
approximately two thirds of the establishments.

7.15	The length of each inspection depends on the category and capacity of
the prison being inspected. The majority of the inspections take place over 1 day.
Inspections of the larger capacity or high security (Category A) prisons may take place
over 2 days.

7.16	Examination of systems and procedures for the interception of prisoners'
communications. Our prison inspections are structured to ensure that key areas
derived from Prison Rules, the relevant PSIs and policies are scrutinised. A typical
inspection includes examination of the following areas:

•	Induction and awareness of prisoners;

•	Procedures for the monitoring prisoners' telephone calls and mail (including
risk assessments, authorisations, monitoring logs);

•	Arrangements for the handling of legally privileged and other confidential
telephone calls and mail;

•	Procedures for the storage, retention and destruction of intercept material.

7.17	Inspection Reports. The reports contain a review of compliance against a
strict set of baselines that derive from Prison Rules and other policy documents. They
contain formal recommendations with a requirement for the prison to report back
within two months to say that the recommendations have been implemented, or what
progress has been made.

67

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Inspection Findings and Recommendations

7.18	The total number of recommendations made during our 88 prison inspections
in 2013 was 465, on average about 5 recommendations for each prison. There has been
a marked general improvement in the last three years with inspectors identifying fewer
recommendations as exemplified by Figure 12.

Figure 12 Total red, amber & green recommendations resulting from prison inspections
2011-2013

600

500

400

300

200

100

2011

2012

2013

0

7.19	A traffic light system (red, amber, green) is in place for the recommendations to
enable prisons to prioritise the areas where remedial action is necessary:

•	Red recommendations - immediate concern - serious breaches and / or non-
compliance with Prison Rules or the NSF which could leave the Governor
vulnerable to challenge.

•	Amber recommendations - non-compliance to a lesser extent; however
remedial action must still be taken in these areas as they could potentially
lead to serious breaches.

•	Green recommendations - represent good practice or areas where the
efficiency and effectiveness of the process could be improved.

7.20	This year 14% of the recommendations were red, 53% amber and 33% green.

68

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

7.21	Figure 13 shows the breakdown of the 2013 recommendations by category.
Figure 13 2013 Prison inspection recommendations by Category

7.22	76% of the recommendations fell into 1 key category - procedures for the
monitoring of prisoners telephone calls and mail. There are four distinct areas of failings
in this category.

7.23	First, failings were identified with the authorisation and / or review procedures.
In a large number of instances our inspectors concluded that the interception risk
assessments were not robustly or properly completed. In these instances the necessity
and proportionality justifications for invoking or reviewing the monitoring had not been
sufficiently made out. In these cases it was difficult to understand how the Governor had
been able to make an informed judgement as to whether the monitoring was necessary
and proportionate on the basis of the information contained on the risk assessment,
authorisation and review documentation. In a number of cases the inspectors examined
other relevant documentation in the prisoner's files and / or reviewed the minutes from
risk management meetings where the particular prisoner had been discussed in an
attempt to satisfy themselves that there was sufficient evidence to support the decisions.

7.24	Second, failings were identified in relation to the actual monitoring. Our inspectors
randomly interrogate the system used for the monitoring of prisoners telephone calls
and the prisoners accounts are compared against the monitoring logs completed by the

69

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

staff conducting the monitoring. In some instances these audits showed that not all of
the calls made by the prisoners subject to offence related or monitoring for other security
purposes had been listened to. Failure to monitor the communications of prisoners who
pose a risk to children, the public or the good order, security and discipline of the prison
could place prison staff in an indefensible position if a serious incident was to occur
which could have been prevented through the gathering of intercept intelligence. More
frequently our inspectors identified that the calls had been listened to, but not in a timely
fashion. This is of concern and could result in a significant piece of intelligence being
gathered from a telephone call which was made a week or two earlier and by this time
the opportunity to react to it may have been missed. It is vitally important for calls to be
monitored in a timely fashion in order to evaluate properly the threat posed by prisoners.

7.25	Third, the staff conducting the monitoring of prisoners communications should
complete monitoring logs to provide an audit trail of the interception that has taken
place and assist to inform the review process. In a large number of cases the monitoring
logs were not completed to a satisfactory standard and recommendations were made to
bring about improvements.

7.26	Fourth, failings were identified with the procedures in place for checking the
contact numbers provided by prisoners subject to public protection measures (for
example, those identified as posing a risk to children, those remanded or convicted of
an offence under the Protection from Harassment Act or subject to a restraining order
or injunction etc.). In the majority of cases the failings were in relation to the record
keeping requirements. However, of more concern, a number of the establishments did
not have robust procedures for checking these prisoners contact numbers. It is obviously
vitally important for sound procedures to be in place to check the contact lists provided
by these prisoners to ensure that victims and other members of the public are protected.

7.27	At the end of each inspection, each individual prison is given an overall rating
(good, satisfactory, poor). This rating is reached by considering the total number of
recommendations made, the severity of those recommendations, and whether those
recommendations had to be carried forward because they were not achieved from the
previous inspection. On the latter point, 94% of the prisons inspected in 2013 had fully
achieved all or the majority of the recommendations emanating from their previous
inspection.

7.28	Figure 14 shows that overall the proportion of prisons achieving a good level of
compliance has steadily risen in the last three years. Comparisons with previous years
are difficult because the prisons being inspected are not the same. However the average
number of recommendations per inspection has fallen slightly in the last 3 years.

70

percentage of inspections conducted in a year

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Figure 14 Overall rating for prison inspections 2011-2013

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

75%

2011	2012	2013

Good

Satisfactory

Poor

71

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Points of Note

Prisons

I have continued to provide non-statutory oversight of the interception of
communications in prisons in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. I do not
currently provide any oversight for prisons in Scotland. It would be preferable, in
my view, if prison oversight was formalised as a statutory function.

The policy covering the interception of prisoners' communications in England and
Wales is fragmented and contradictory in places. This makes it difficult for the
prisons themselves to understand the requirements fully and for our inspectors
to conduct the oversight. NOMS must put in place a clear defined policy and risk
assessment documents for the interception of prisoners' communications.

I have recommended that the Northern Ireland Prison Service should be aiming
to issue a comprehensive Instruction to Governors to supplement the Northern
Ireland Prison Rules in relation to the interception of prisoners' communications.

In 2013 our office conducted 88 prison inspections which equates to approximately
two thirds of the establishments.

A total of 465 recommendations emanated from these inspections, on average about
5 recommendations for each prison. There has been a marked general improvement
in the last three years with inspectors identifying fewer recommendations. Overall
the proportion of prisons achieving a good level of compliance has steadily risen
in the last three years.

72

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Appendix 1: Decision of the Investigatory Powers
Tribunal about section 8(4) of RIPA 2000

The Investigatory Powers Tribunal (IPT) is a tribunal established by section 65 of RIPA
2000. It is the only appropriate tribunal for the purposes of section 7 of the Human
Rights Act 1998 for proceedings under section 7(l)(a) of the 1998 Act against any of
the intelligence services (see section 65(2)(a) and (3) of RIPA 2000). There is no appeal
against determinations of the Tribunal and their decisions may not be questioned in any
court (section 67(8)). Their decisions may be regarded in effect as binding authority.

The Interception of Communications Commissioner has no function in relation to the
Tribunal and is not made aware of any of their unpublished deliberations, except that,
by section 57(3) of RIPA 2000, the Commissioner is obliged to give the Tribunal all such
assistance as the Tribunal may require for their investigations or determinations. I
personally have not been asked so far to assist the Tribunal and I am not aware that my
predecessors have been asked in the recent past.

Decision (IPT/01/77). On 9th December 2004, in Open Rulings on a Preliminary Issues of
Law, the Tribunal considered the lawful integrity of section 8(4) of RIPA 2000. Eventually,
the Tribunal considered and determined one issue only. But it is evident from the decision
that the complainants, who were represented by leading counsel, had initially raised (but
abandoned) other issues. I do not know (other than by possible inference) what those
other issues were, nor do I have access to the underlying facts which were alleged. But I
imagine that leading counsel would have been instructed to pursue other issues if it had
been thought that they were viable.

The issue which the Tribunal did examine was

"... the lawfulness of the "filtering process" relating to material obtained pursuant to a
warrant issued under section 8(4) of [RIPA 2000]." (paragraph 4 of the Ruling).

The challenge was that there were no published selection criteria for the operation of a
section 8(4) warrant and that the section 8(4) process was therefore not "in accordance
with law" for the purpose of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

The Tribunal rejected this contention with detailed reference to a number of cases
containing relevant human rights jurisprudence. They accepted the case advanced on
behalf of the respondents (the three Intelligence Services) that

"the scope and manner of exercise of the powers to intercept communications and make
use of the information obtained are indicated with a requisite degree of certainty to
satisfy the minimum requirements ... " Christie v United Kingdom [1993] 78-ADR 119 at
133ff.

The respondent's submissions proceeded

"... by reference to the criteria in section 5(3), as exercised with proportionality and the
existence of the multiple safeguards". (Rulings paragraph 38).

The final paragraph 39 of the Rulings is as follows:

74

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

"The provisions, in this case the right to intercept and access material covered by a
s8(4) warrant, and the criteria by reference to which it is exercised, are in our judgment
sufficiently accessible and foreseeable to be in accordance with the law. The parameters
in which the discretion to conduct interception is carried on, by reference to s5(3) and
subject to the safeguards referred to, are plain from the face of the statute. In this
difficult and perilous area of national security, taking into account both the necessary
narrow approach to Article 8(2) and the fact that the burden is placed on the Respondent,
we are satisfied that the balance is properly struck".

This ruling is, so far as it goes, in the nature of binding authority, at least so long as the
Tribunal does not depart from it or modulate it. I say "so far as it goes", because on a
narrow view the Tribunal only decided one issue. It might be possible for a different legal
challenge to be advanced, although, as I have indicated, other issues were advanced in
this case but abandoned. The general tenor of the Rulings is to endorse the structural
integrity in law of the section 8(4) procedure including the principle of a filtering process
to reduce and make individual selections from generalised interception material.

In the course of the Ruling, the Tribunal considered and took account of the following:

the relevant provisions of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention; sections 5, 8(1), 8(4),
8(5), 15(1),(2) and (3) and 16 of RIPA 2000; and paragraphs 4.2, 4.8 and 5.2 of the Code
of Practice;

no challenge was made to the lawfulness of the procedures under a section 8(1) warrant
(paragraph 10);

no challenge was made to the lawfulness of a section 8(4) warrant itself nor to the
interception of material pursuant to such warrant (paragraph 10);

the Tribunal's own view that there is no difference in the access provisions for section 8(1)
and section 8(4) warrants (paragraphs 20.3 and 22);

parts of a witness statement from a Director General at the Home Office referring to public
authority manuals setting out comprehensive instructions for the specific application
of section 15 and 16 safeguards (paragraph 14); and the process under section 8(4)
permitting the selection and examination of selected material within the statutory limits
and safeguards (paragraph 33).

75

	Data Type  (RIPA s.21(4))			Statutory Purpose  (RIPA s.22(2) & SI 2010/480)									
Public Authority Group	Traffic	Service Use	Subscriber	(a) national security	(b) prevent detect crime / prevent disorder	(c) economic well being of the UK	(d) - public safety	(e) - public health	(f) tax, duty, levy...	(g) in an emergency preventing death / injury...	Art 2(a) miscarriage of justice	Art 2(b) to identify person who has died or is unable to identify themselves, to identify next of kin or other person	Notes
- Intelligence Services	•	•	•	•	•	•							
-	Territorial Police Forces of England, Wales, Northern Ireland & Scotland  -	British Transport Police	•	•	•	•	•	•	•	•		•		•	(d) & (e) subscriber only
- National Crime Agency	•	•	•		•					•		•	
- The Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs	•	•	•		•				•				(f) subscriber only
- United Kingdom Border Agency	•	•	•		•		•					•	(d) subscriber only. Asylum fraud investigations can only acquire service use and subscriber information.
-	Ministry of Defence Police  -	Royal Air Force Police  -	Royal Military Police  -	Royal Naval Police	•	•	•	•	•	•				•			
- Civil Nuclear Constabulary	•	•	•	•	•								
-	Port of Dover Police  -	Port of Liverpool Police	•	•	•		•		•	•				•	(d) & (e) subscriber only
-	Financial Conduct Authority  -	Gambling Commission  -	Gangmasters Licensing Authority  -	The Information Commissioner  -	Office of Communications  -	Police Ombudsman for Northern Ireland  -	Royal Mail Group  -	Serious Fraud Office	•	•	•		•								
- Independent Police Complaints Commission	•	•	•		•							•	

O

QJ

r+

QJ

C

=3

CL

Q

2

2

"O

Q)

n

=r

Q}

~0

i—H

0)

N 1

Annex A: Public Authorities with access to Communications

-	The Ministry of Justice - National
Offender Management Service

-	Northern Ireland Office - Northern
Ireland Prison Service

-	Criminal Cases Review Commission

-	Scottish Criminal Cases
Review Commission

Department of Transport:

-	Air Accident Investigation Branch

-	Marine Accident Investigation Branch

-	Rail Accident Investigation Branch

-	Department for Transport
Maritime Coastguard Agency

-	Fire & Rescue Authorities

-	Ambulance Services / Trusts

-	Environment Agency

-	Health & Safety Executive

-	Department for Health - Medicines &
Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency

-	Scottish Environment Protection Agency

-	Food Standards Agency

-	Charity Commission

-	DWP - Child Maintenance Group

-	Department of Agriculture & Rural
Development (Northern Ireland)

-	Department for Business
Innovation Skills

-	Department for Environment
Food & Rural Affairs

-	Department of the Environment
Northern Ireland

-	Health & Social Care Business
Services Organisation - Central
Services Agency (Northern Ireland)

-	Office of Fair Trading

-	Pensions Regulator

-	NHS Protect

-	NHS Scotland Counter Fraud Services

-	The Department of Enterprise Trade
and Investment (orthern Ireland)

"J

"J

- Local Authorities

(d) subscriber only

(b) service use & sub-
scriber only
(d) subscriber only.

(g) traffic, service use &
subscriber

(d) & (e) subscriber only

(e) subscriber only

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Annex B: Total Notices & Authorisations

for each Public Authority under RIPA 2000 Part I Chapter II

This Annex details the Total RIPA 2000 s.23(3) Authorisations granted or s.22(4) Notices given during 2013 by
individual Public Authorities, excluding those given orally in urgent circumstances. It is organised according to
public authority type*.

A Total of 514,608 Notices and Authorisations (excluding urgent oral) were granted /given under RIPA
2000 Part I Chapter II by 214 public authorities in 2013.

*Caveat: The main report (paragraphs 4.18 and 4.19) has highlighted the fact that the statistics we are currently
able to collect under Paragraph 6.5 of the Communications Data Code of Practice are flawed and potentially
misleading. This annex details the number of Authorisations granted and Notices given for communications data
by individual public authorities. Authorisations and Notices are the method by which public authorities make
requests for communications data. There are essentially 2 difficulties with the Authorisation and Notice Statistics:

•	Some public authorities may request multiple items of data on one authorisation or notice

•	There are a number of different workflow systems in use by public authorities which have different counting
mechanisms for authorisations and notices.

The inconsistent counting and aggregation of data requests on a single authorisation and notice mean that the
statistics, although accurately recorded by each individual public authority, are not necessarily comparable

Police Forces & Law Enforcement Agencies

	Total
Avon & Somerset Constabulary	9,868
Bedfordshire Police	2,743
British Transport Police	1,260
Cambridgeshire Constabulary	2,166
Cheshire Constabulary	3,814
City of London Police	2,587
Civil Nuclear Constabulary	11
Cleveland Police	2,957
Cumbria Constabulary	2,710
Derbyshire Constabulary	2,897
Devon & Cornwall Police	11,471
Dorset Police	4,316
Durham Constabulary	6,218
Dyfed Powys Police	2,266
Gloucestershire Constabulary	1,590
Greater Manchester Police	19,247
Gwent Police	2,460
Hampshire Constabulary	8,818
Hertfordshire Constabulary	7,567
HMRC	11,820
Humberside Police	2,123
Kent Police & Essex Police	16,242
Lancashire Constabulary	10,690
Leicestershire Police	5,697
Lincolnshire Police	1,734
Merseyside Police	22,347
Metropolitan Police	94,778

	Total
Ministry of Defence Police	171
National Crime Agency	40,064
Norfolk Constabulary	1,923
North Wales Police	2,037
North Yorkshire Police	4,058
Northamptonshire Police	2,169
Northumbria Police	6,211
Nottinghamshire Police	7,749
Police Scotland	19,390
Police Service of Northern Ireland	6,395
Port of Liverpool Police	12
Royal Air Force Police	20
Royal Military Police	706
Royal Navy Police	16
South Wales Police	8,777
South Yorkshire Police	6,801
Staffordshire Police	5,121
Suffolk Constabulary	1,247
Surrey Police	5,193
Sussex Police	3,051
Thames Valley Police	5,221
UK Border Agency	6,056
Warwickshire Police	1,076
West Mercia Police	10,816
West Midlands Police	28,254
West Yorkshire Police	12,676
Wiltshire Police	5,636

Grand Total

451,243

The Port of Dover Police reported that they did not grant any Authorisations or give any Notices in 2013

78

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

The Intelligence Services

	Total
GCHQ	1,406
The Secret Intelligence Service (Mi6)	672
The Security Service (Mi5)	56,918

Grand Total

58,996

Other Public Authorities

	Total
Air Accident Investigation Branch	4
Criminal Cases Review Commission	2
Department for Business, Innovations & Skills	34
Department of Enterprise Trade & Investment (Northern Ireland)	118
Department of the Environment Northern Ireland	1
Department of Work & Pensions Child Maintenance Group	29
Environment Agency	18
Financial Conduct Authority	1618
Gambling Commission	16
Gangmasters Licensing Authority	50
Hampshire Fire & Rescue Service	2
Health & Safety Executive	15

	Total
Independent Police Complaints Commission	50
Information Commissioner's Office	40
Marine Accident Investigation Branch	11
Maritime & Coastguard Agency	2
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency	105
Ministry of Justice - National Offender Management Service	267
NHS Protect	21
NHS Scotland Counter Fraud Services	3
Office of Communications	39
Office of Fair Trading	3
Rail Accident Investigation Branch	2
Royal Mail	119
Serious Fraud Office	34

Grand Total

2,603

The following 'other' public authorities reported that they did not grant any Authorisations or give any Notices
during 2013:

•	Charity Commission

•	Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs

•	Department of Agriculture and Rural Development Northern Ireland

•	Food Standards Authority

•	Health & Social Care Business Services Organisation - Central Services Agency (Northern Ireland)

•	Northern Ireland Office - Northern Ireland Prison Service

•	Northern Ireland Health & Social Services Central Services Agency

•	The Office of the Police Ombudsman for Northern Ireland

•	Pensions Regulator

•	Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission

•	Scottish Environmental Protection Agency

•	No other Fire Authority

•	No Ambulance Service / Trust

79

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Local Authorities

121 Local Authorities have reported never using their powers to acquire communications data

172 Local Authorities in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland reported they did not use their powers
in 2013, but have used their powers in previous years.

The following 132 Local Authorities reported using their powers in 2013

	Total
Aberdeenshire Council	4
Argyll and Bute Council	4
Bedford Borough Council	10
Birmingham City Council	87
Blackburn with Darwen Borough Council	2
Blackpool Borough Council	6
Bournemouth Borough Council	13
Bracknell Forest Borough Council	3
Bridgend County Borough Council	6
Brighton & Hove City Council	2
Bristol City Council	12
Buckinghamshire County Council	79
Bury Metropolitan Borough Council	4
Caerphilly County Borough Council	5
Cannock Chase Council	1
Cardiff City and County Council	3
Central Bedfordshire Council	1
Cheshire East Council	63
Cheshire West & Chester Council	75
Cornwall County Council	17
Cotswold District Council	1
Coventry City Council	7
Cumbria County Council	3
Darlington Borough Council	9
Denbighshire County Council	13
Derbyshire County Council	3
Devon County Council	2
Doncaster Metropolitan Borough Council	2
Dorset County Council	6
Dudley Metropolitan Borough Council	4
Dundee City Council	1
Durham County Council	4
East Ayreshire District Council	2

	Total
East Hertfordshire District Council	7
East Riding of Yorkshire Council	3
East Sussex County Council	12
Edinburgh City Council	4
Fife Council	1
Flintshire County Council	4
Gateshead Metropolitan Borough Council	1
Glasgow City Council	21
Gloucestershire County Council	7
Hampshire County Council	12
Hertfordshire County Council	6
Hertsmere Borough Council	12
Kent County Council	50
Knowsley Metropolitan Borough Council	24
Lancashire County Council	37
Leicester City Council	3
Lincolnshire County Council	26
Liverpool City Council	28
London Borough of Barnet Council	6
London Borough of Brent Council	2
London Borough of Bromley Council	87
London Borough of Croydon Council	9
London Borough of Ealing Council	2
London Borough of Enfield Council	87
London Borough of Hammersmith & Fulham	2
London Borough of Havering Council	22
London Borough of Lambeth Council	2
London Borough of Lewisham Council	4
London Borough of Merton	2
London Borough of Newham Council	4
London Borough of Redbridge	21
London Borough of Richmond upon Thames	1
London Borough of Southwark	4

80

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Local Authorities continued...

	Total
London Borough of Sutton	11
London Borough of Tower Hamlets	25
Manchester City Council	4
Medway Council	5
Middlesborough Council	19
Milton Keynes Council	17
Monmouthshire County Council	1
Neath Port Talbot County Borough Council	4
Newport City Council	2
Norfolk County Council	2
North East Lincolnshire Council	4
North Kesteven District Council	1
North Lanarkshire Council	18
North Lincolnshire Council	6
North Yorkshire County Council	7
Northamptonshire County Council	31
Northumberland County Council	3
Nottingham City Council	1
Nottinghamshire County Council	58
Oldham Metropolitan Borough Council	7
Oxfordshire County Council	10
Peterborough City Council	1
Plymouth City Council	7
Poole Borough Council	6
Portsmouth City Council	1
Reading Borough Council	4
Redcar & Cleveland Borough Council	69
Rhondda Cynon Taff County Borough Council	11
Rochdale Metropolitan Borough Council	6
Rotherham Borough Council	2
Royal Borough of Greenwich Council	1
Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames Council	1
Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead	10

	Total
Rushmoor District Council	1
Sandwell Metropolitan Borough Council	6
Slough Borough Council	20
Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council	7
South Oxfordshire District Council	4
South Somerset District Council	2
Southampton City Council	81
St Helens Metropolitan Borough Council	3
Staffordshire County Council	3
Stirling Council	5
Stockton-on-Tees Borough Council	2
Stoke-on-Trent City Council	2
Suffolk County Council	21
Surrey County Council	1
Swale Borough Council	1
Swansea City and County Council	5
Swindon Borough Council	9
Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council	2
Three Rivers District Council	4
Torbay Borough Council	1
Vale of White Horse District Council	2
Walsall Metropolitan Borough Council	3
Warrington Council	15
Watford Borough Council	53
Wealden District Council	3
West Berkshire Council	31
West Sussex County Council	22
Westminster City Council	31
Wigan Metropolitan Borough Council	2
Wirral Metropolitan Borough Council	1
Wolverhampton City Council	6
Worcestershire Regulatory Services*	15
York City Council	80

Grand Total

1766

*Worcestershire Regulatory Services Is a shared service acting on behalf Worcestershire County Council,
Redditch Borough Council, Bromsgrove District Council, Wyre Forest District Council, Worcester City Council,
Malvern Hills District Council and Wychavon District Council.

81

2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner

Annex C: Budget

Our office had a budget for 2013/14 of £1,101,000 allocated as below.

Expenditure for 2013/14 was not available at the time of going to print but will be available
on our website after the end of April 2014.

I am aware the salary, travel and subsistence costs will be significantly less than the
budget due to the timing of the recruitment of the 3 new inspectors.

Descripton	Total (£)
Staff costs	948,000
Travel and subsistence	110,000
IT and telecommunications	25,000
Training & recruitment	5,000
Office and security equipment	3,500
Conferences and meetings	7,000
Legal	2,500

82

ISBN 978-1-4741-0157-8

781

474

1578

9