TOP SECRET-ELLTEJEL USA: 

Tint-as for Dutch Analytic Exchange

 

l4 Palomar-5.10.13

[ligament?ion of in. the Eetherlands 

SI. REL TO USE: The meeting began with a brie?ng from the Dutch about
their reorganization and the creation of the new SiGlH-Tand Cyher Division and Eingle
Point ofContact - noted that Proj ect_to create this new disisi-on
appears to he on traclu:= with Mil-5D and .?sllr?D technical specialists starting to he pulled
out of their original locations tojoin the new located at Ali-'3 HQ in
Eoetenneer. This new division will he headed by a steering committee comprised of

hill-TD Director Pieter Eindt and Director Roi:- Ee-rtholee. Under these will be the
headed a sidenote= plans are under waft for- to 1:isit
EBA at the end of islet" . Slide .7 includes a couple of abbreviations: .515 

El 513T Division, SUM is Special Investigating Committee. ?lls-l0 the suppoit
organization. The technical specialists will work closelj: saith the 
[including - branch}: who ?will remain in Ali?le outside the new -entitj:.. FLECEA.
{the Dutch equivalent oflAD} will prob ably" also he pulled into the new entitjs.

3] REL USA: The Dutch created the National Securith Center
in Jan E?ll to ccwer general [not military]- issues. and this center is still
dealing with gtowing pains. it is having difficult}; ?lling all its vacancies. it still lacks a
legal framework and private companies fight any public notification that Effll'?'l' attacks
haste taken place. Ether] asked where to turn for help in the case of an intrusion on a
commercial emit}: the answer was that it depends?if the help needed is technical. then
ctherwise. HCSC. svelte-t1 that Al?s-?12} has good relaticns with ccmpanies.
The national police has liaison with HCSC also.

 

SI REL TD USA: National Detection Network governs Dutch
sensors. This network is DEVELUPll?l??some sensors are public and some are private:

some entities have their own? and they tie into the NC SC. 

 

Derived from: HEAL 
Dated: 330.701 '33
Declassifj: Din-1r l?i?l 01:
TOP USA, FLD

TOP SECRET TELLEEL TD USA. "ft-1D

TD USA. KLDJ Some other notes,

- The Dutch do not have red or blue teaming yet

I All-?12} is contented with espionage. not crime

I The Dutch are wail-ting towasd having only one point where all government
agencies touch the int emet, because this will he easier to monitct defend

I ED percent ofl?CSA tools used to ?nd malware are commercial. while 1'30 percent
of Dutch tools are

i In the cyher realm. there is no {ll-5E govemment agency in charge yet. but it will
eventually he the 

I There is still no cahle access yet. hut the laws may he changed in the nest year or
two. However, Dutch lawyers believe that they can tap it now ifit is for

DEFENSIVE measures only
?leis-fora and the Union Router 
{3 [El TCI- USA: ELDJ The web forum discussion was of greater interest. The

Dutch provided an overview oftheir data presentation tool (at a very high level}. They
acquire databases via CHE access.

 

 

Theylre loolcing at manying up the forum

 

TIDE EECRET USA. NED

TDP TD USA: 

data with other social networlc info= and trying to figure out good ways to mine the data
that they have.

TD USA: itiLD'} I[Questions the Dutch had were based on our analytic

tradecraft_-noted that we use lceywords to some enterrt: and outlined the division of
effort between?and sustained targeting- [ftlrat partner engagement is of interest
[from- perspective: it is in that we v-aant to traclc their activities on -and
mar-:imiae their enploitation ofthat we can focus on tradecraft and
general analytic philosophy and build quite a bit of credibility that way-

[8.7.38 LLREL TD Eli's: l?fL Dl-gave a brief update on our efforts with Tor: noting that
the multi-national effort seemed the best avenue for a sustained capability at present and
we are actively worlcing our legal processes to malce progress.

ITEMS FRDM 14 FEBRUART 3:113 Di?sT 

{These action items have also been sent separately}

1} EDD-TAD and HTDD: Draft a cyber MDU for Dutch review
to inform DIRNSA that i'leU will be drafted and ai'sllr'D
Directorboth infonned; will draft h'lDU}

2} Eeelc preview ofpublic version of_message and
convey to?that having a preview in the futureirr time to alert Dutch
DEBTS would be ideal [done?not enough time to obtain preview for this round: but
theidea for the future has been conveyed}

 

4} lit-Till tryto obtain updated version of?for
Dutch deone}

5} share infonnation= handles= etc= on haclcers
En} (Si-El} 1Will create |Dyber forum on will forward Tutel age and

Malware presentations: 1itl-r?ebfora article: and agenda via  etings sent: but
ass-citing list ofwlrich DE- personnel to put in IDyber forum}

TDP SECRET-ZEIJREL TD USA: l?fLD

