 3" SI 3" New Contact-Chajning Procedures to Allow Better,
Faster Analysis

FROM: -
-

Run Date: o1fo3f2o11

 

(UHFDUD) Editor?s note: A brie?ng will be held on 3? January from moo?1130
in the Friedman Auditorium at NSAVF regarding the new procedures described
below. All SID employees are welcome to attend.

 

(SHEIHREIJ and Mission Managers: 011 29 November, 
- signed 51]] Management Directive 424,, which changes
procedures regarding metadata analysis. Speci?cally, these new procedures
permit contact chainino, and other analysis, from and through
any selector, irrespective ofnationa lity or location, in order to
follow or discover nalitlforeign intelligence targets. [Formerly
were required to determine whether or not selectors were associated
with US oamrnunicants.)

 

(U) The Impact

(SHSIHREIJ These new procedures allow NBA to fully exploit
communications metadata (which is strictly de?ned in the procedures), for
foreign intelligence purposes, without the restrictions associated with selection
of communications content. The impact of the new procedures is two?fold. In
the ?rst place it allows NBA to discover and track connections between foreign
intelligence targets and possible and Party or US communicants. In the second
place it enables large?scale graph analysis on very large sets of
communications metadata without having to check foreignness of every node
or address in the graph. in 52 have used this to great bene?t over the
past year and a half under a pilot program.

(U) Compliance Issues

(SHSIHREIJ Management Directive 424 Development 
Communications Metadata Analysis?) provides guidance on the NSAICSS
implementation of the ?Department of Defense Supplemental Procedures
Governing Conununications Metadata Analysis? as approved by the
US. Attorney General and the Secretary of Defense. The SPCMA covers
communications metadata collected under Executive |[irrder 12333 authorities.

(SHSIHREIJ As does any new authority or capability, the Supplemental
Procedures come with a cost in terms of additional care that we must
take with respect to compliance responsibilities and obligations. The
primary new responsibility is the requirement:

- to enter a foreign intelligence justi?cation for melting a query
or starting a chain,

and
- to perform spot-checks of user queries.

Additionally, the analyst must remain cognizant of minimisation procedures
associated with retention and dissemination of US person information.
SPCMA covers analytic procedures and does not affect existing procedures
for collection, retention or dissemination of US person information.

(SISIHREL) SPCMA obligations also include the need for additional training
on what the procedures do and do not cover, advisory banners on 
enabled metadata databases, query auditing, and annual reports to the
Department of Justice. Details on this implementation are included in


(U) Next Steps

(S 3" SI ,5 In order to take advantage of the Supplemental Procedures
(SPCMA), will need to be identified for use of through their
mission?management chain and complete the online informational brie?ng.
This will be managed through GATEKEEPER and,Ir or the Account Admin
processes. In addition to the required online informational brie?ng, a series of
live information brie?ngs are being planned. The ?rst of these will be held in
the Friedman Auditorinrn on January from moo?113D, and is open to all SID
employees.

(U,l Please consult with your local PEI-Cs above, or [in the absence of
one}, you may contact -, for information.

