YAHOO/

October 17, 2013

VIA EMAIL (Libe-secretariat&ep.europa.eu)

Juan Fernando López Aguilar
Chairman

Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs (LIBE)

European Parliament
60 rue Wiertz
B-1047 Brussels

Re:	Invitation to Participate in the European Parliament LIBE Committee

Inquiry on Electronic Mass Surveillance of EU citizens

Dear Chairman López Aguilar:

Thank you for your invitation to participate in the 7 November European Parliament LIBE Committee inquiry
on electronic mass surveillance of EU citizens ("Inquiry").

We greatly respect the LIBE Committee's efforts to foment a robust and open discussion of national security,
user privacy, human rights and conflict of laws. These are issues of shared concern. Yahoo has worked hard
over the years to earn users' trust, and we fight hard to preserve it In 2007, we challenged the lawfulness of
amendments to the U.S. Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. This year, we and other technology companies
sued the U.S. government for the ability to share more about any U.S. national security requests that we
receive. As a company, we continually evaluate whether further actions can be taken to protect privacy and
our ability to defend it.

In light of this longstanding commitment, we consider it essential for the U.S. government to provide greater
assurances about the scope of its user data requests. This is why we urged the U.S. government to produce its
own transparency report, produced our first global law enforcement transparency report earlier this year,
and participated in President Obama’s Review Group on Intelligence and Communications Technologies,
which will consider potential policy changes in connection with oversight of U.S. intelligence activities.

To the extent that Yahoo receives requests for data under U.S. intelligence statutes, such requests and the
processes used to respond to them are classified. If we send someone to the Inquiry from the U.S. familiar
with the U.S. government’s intelligence requests, their participation potentially risks breaching their national
security clearance and U.S. law; and, to send someone from Europe without such knowledge would not
provide meaningful input to the LIBE Committee.

Therefore, we deeply regret that we must decline your invitation to participate in the Inquiry. This situation
illustrates why we feel compelled to continue seeking a right to make greater disclosures under U.S. law and
why we strongly advocate for government to government diplomacy around these matters.

Tekedra N. Mawakana
Global Head of Public Policy and
Deputy General Counsel

101 Constitution Avenue, NW Suite 800W Washington, DC 20001
P: 202 777 1050 F: 202 777 1051