UK Representation
to the EU Brussels

Juan Fernando LÓPEZ AGUILAR

The Chairman

Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

European Parliament

The Permanent Representative
Sir Jon Cunliffe CB

Avenue d'Auderghem 10
1040 Brussels
Belgium

Tel.: +32 (2) 287 8271
Fax: + 32 (2) 287 8396
e-mail: ps.cunliffe@fco.gov.uk

1 October 2013

Dear Mr. Lopez Aguilar,

Thank you for your letter of 26 September to Sir Iain Lobban, inviting him to
attend your Committee’s hearing on 3 October.

The United Kingdom’s Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) is
one of the United Kingdom’s three Intelligence Agencies, which are a vital tool
in the protection of the UK’s national security. National security is the sole
responsibility of Member States. The activities of intelligence services are
equally the sole responsibility of each Member State and fall outside the
competences of the Union. For that reason, and with respect, the UK must
decline your invitation for the Director of GCHQ to attend your Hearing.

Further, it is my Government’s consistent policy not to comment on
intelligence matters.

The activities of GCHQ, and indeed the UK’s other Intelligence Agencies, are
governed by one of the world’s most robust legal framework and oversight
arrangements that ensures that UK intelligence activity adheres to strict
principles of necessity, proportionality and legality. All UK security and
intelligence agencies practise and uphold the law at all times, including when
dealing with information from outside the UK. The UK’s legislation is fully

compatible with the right to privacy, as set out in Article 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights.

For information, the relevant UK law is: the Security Service Act 1989; the
Intelligence Services Act 1994; and the Regulation of Investigatory Powers
Act 2000. The legislation is available at www.legislation.gov.uk. Independent
oversight is conducted by the Interception of Communications Commissioner
and the Intelligence Services Commissioner. Details of their work and the
independent reports they produce can be found at:
www.intelligencecommissioners.com and www.iocco-uk.info.

Yours,

JON CUNLIFFE