THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary

For Immediate Release

January 17, 2014

January 17, 2014

PRESIDENTIAL POLICY DIRECTIVE/PPD-28
SUBJECT:	Signals Intelligence Activities

The United States, like other nations, has gathered intelligence
throughout its history to ensure that national security and
foreign policy decisionmakers have access to timely, accurate,
and insightful information.

The collection of signals intelligence is necessary for the
United States to advance its national security and foreign
policy interests and to protect its citizens and the citizens of
its allies and partners from harm. At the same time, signals
intelligence activities and the possibility that such activities
may be improperly disclosed to the public pose multiple risks.
These include risks to:	our relationships with other nations,

including the cooperation we receive from other nations on law
enforcement, counterterrorism, and other issues; our commercial,
economic, and financial interests, including a potential loss of
international trust in U.S. firms and the decreased willingness
of other nations to participate in international data sharing,
privacy, and regulatory regimes; the credibility of our
commitment to an open, interoperable, and secure global
Internet; and the protection of intelligence sources and
methods.

In addition, our signals intelligence activities must take into
account that all persons should be treated with dignity and
respect, regardless of their nationality or wherever they might
reside, and that all persons have legitimate privacy interests
in the handling of their personal information.

In determining why, whether, when, and how the United States
conducts signals intelligence activities, we must weigh all of
these considerations in a context in which information and
communications technologies are constantly changing. The
evolution of technology has created a world where communications
important to our national security and the communications all of
us make as part of our daily lives are transmitted through the
same channels. This presents new and diverse opportunities for,
and challenges with respect to, the collection of intelligence -
and especially signals intelligence. The United States
Intelligence Community (IC) has achieved remarkable success in
developing enhanced capabilities to perform its signals
intelligence mission in this rapidly changing world, and these
enhanced capabilities are a major reason we have been able to
adapt to a dynamic and challenging security environment.1 The

For the purposes of this directive, the terms "Intelligence Community" and
"elements of the Intelligence Community" shall have the same meaning as they
do in Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981, as amended (Executive Order
12333).

2

United States must preserve and continue to develop a robust and
technologically advanced signals intelligence capability to
protect our security and that of our partners and allies. Our
signals intelligence capabilities must also be agile enough to
enable us to focus on fleeting opportunities or emerging crises
and to address not only the issues of today, but also the issues
of tomorrow, which we may not be able to foresee.

Advanced technologies can increase risks, as well as
opportunities, however, and we must consider these risks when
deploying our signals intelligence capabilities. The IC
conducts signals intelligence activities with care and precision
to ensure that its collection, retention, use, and dissemination
of signals intelligence account for these risks. In light of
the evolving technological and geopolitical environment, we must
continue to ensure that our signals intelligence policies and
practices appropriately take into account our alliances and
other partnerships; the leadership role that the United States
plays in upholding democratic principles and universal human
rights; the increased globalization of trade, investment, and
information flows; our commitment to an open, interoperable and
secure global Internet; and the legitimate privacy and civil
liberties concerns of U.S. citizens and citizens of other
nations.

Presidents have long directed the acquisition of foreign
intelligence and counterintelligence pursuant to their
constitutional authority to conduct U.S. foreign relations and
to fulfill their constitutional responsibilities as Commander in
Chief and Chief Executive. They have also provided direction on
the conduct of intelligence activities in furtherance of these
authorities and responsibilities, as well as in execution of
laws enacted by the Congress. Consistent with this historical
practice, this directive articulates principles to guide why,
whether, when, and how the United States conducts signals
intelligence activities for authorized foreign intelligence and
counterintelligence purposes.

Section 1. Principles Governing the Collection of Signals
Intelligence.

Signals intelligence collection shall be authorized and
conducted consistent with the following principles:

(a) The collection of signals intelligence shall be

authorized by statute or Executive Order, proclamation,
or other Presidential directive, and undertaken in

2	For the purposes of this directive, the terms "foreign intelligence" and
"counterintelligence" shall have the same meaning as they have in Executive
Order 12333. Thus, "foreign intelligence" means "information relating to the
capabilities, intentions, or activities of foreign governments or elements
thereof, foreign organizations, foreign persons, or international
terrorists," and "counterintelligence" means "information gathered and
activities conducted to identify, deceive, exploit, disrupt, or protect
against espionage, other intelligence activities, sabotage, or assassinations
conducted for or on behalf of foreign powers, organizations, or persons, or
their agents, or international terrorist organizations or activities."
Executive Order 12333 further notes that "[i]ntelligence includes foreign
intelligence and counterintelligence."

3	Unless otherwise specified, this directive shall apply to signals
intelligence activities conducted in order to collect communications or
information about communications, except that it shall not apply to signals
intelligence activities undertaken to test or develop signals intelligence
capabilities.

3

accordance with the Constitution and applicable statutes,
Executive Orders, proclamations, and Presidential
directives.

(b)	Privacy and civil liberties shall be integral
considerations in the planning of U.S. signals
intelligence activities. The United States shall not
collect signals intelligence for the purpose of
suppressing or burdening criticism or dissent, or for
disadvantaging persons based on their ethnicity, race,
gender, sexual orientation, or religion. Signals
intelligence shall be collected exclusively where there
is a foreign intelligence or counterintelligence purpose
to support national and departmental missions and not for
any other purposes.

(c)	The collection of foreign private commercial information
or trade secrets is authorized only to protect the
national security of the United States or its partners
and allies. It is not an authorized foreign intelligence
or counterintelligence purpose to collect such
information to afford a competitive advantage4 5 to U.S.
companies and U.S. business sectors commercially.

(d)	Signals intelligence activities shall be as tailored as
feasible. In determining whether to collect signals
intelligence, the United States shall consider the
availability of other information, including from
diplomatic and public sources. Such appropriate and
feasible alternatives to signals intelligence should be
prioritized.

Sec. 2. Limitations on the Use of Signals Intelligence
Collected in Bulk.

Locating new or emerging threats and other vital national
security information is difficult, as such information is often
hidden within the large and complex system of modern global
communications. The United States must consequently collect
signals intelligence in bulk in certain circumstances in order
to identify these threats. Routine communications and
communications of national security interest increasingly
transit the same networks, however, and the collection of
signals intelligence in bulk may consequently result in the
collection of information about persons whose activities are not
of foreign intelligence or counterintelligence value. The
United States will therefore impose new limits on its use of
signals intelligence collected in bulk. These limits are
intended to protect the privacy and civil liberties of all
persons, whatever their nationality and regardless of where they
might reside.

In particular, when the United States collects nonpublicly
available signals intelligence in bulk, it shall use that data

4	Certain economic purposes, such as identifying trade or sanctions violations
or government influence or direction, shall not constitute competitive
advantage.

5	The limitations contained in this section do not apply to signals
intelligence data that is temporarily acquired to facilitate targeted
collection. References to signals intelligence collected in "bulk" mean the
authorized collection of large quantities of signals intelligence data which,
due to technical or operational considerations, is acquired without the use
of discriminants (e.g., specific identifiers, selection terms, etc.).

4

only for the purposes of detecting and countering:	(1)

espionage and other threats and activities directed by foreign
powers or their intelligence services against the United States
and its interests; (2) threats to the United States and its
interests from terrorism; (3) threats to the United States and
its interests from the development, possession, proliferation,
or use of weapons of mass destruction; (4) cybersecurity
threats; (5) threats to U.S. or allied Armed Forces or other U.S
or allied personnel; and (6) transnational criminal threats,
including illicit finance and sanctions evasion related to the
other purposes named in this section. In no event may signals
intelligence collected in bulk be used for the purpose of
suppressing or burdening criticism or dissent; disadvantaging
persons based on their ethnicity, race, gender, sexual
orientation, or religion; affording a competitive advantage to
U.S. companies and U.S. business sectors commercially; or
achieving any purpose other than those identified in this
section.

The Assistant to the President and National Security Advisor
(APNSA), in consultation with the Director of National
Intelligence (DNI), shall coordinate, on at least an annual
basis, a review of the permissible uses of signals intelligence
collected in bulk through the National Security Council
Principals and Deputies Committee system identified in PPD-1 or
any successor document. At the end of this review, I will be
presented with recommended additions to or removals from the
list of the permissible uses of signals intelligence collected
in bulk.

The DNI shall maintain a list of the permissible uses of signals
intelligence collected in bulk. This list shall be updated as
necessary and made publicly available to the maximum extent
feasible, consistent with the national security.

Sec. 3. Refining the Process for Collecting Signals
Intelligence.

U.S. intelligence collection activities present the potential
for national security damage if improperly disclosed. Signals
intelligence collection raises special concerns, given the
opportunities and risks created by the constantly evolving
technological and geopolitical environment; the unique nature of
such collection and the inherent concerns raised when signals
intelligence can only be collected in bulk; and the risk of
damage to our national security interests and our law
enforcement, intelligence-sharing, and diplomatic relationships
should our capabilities or activities be compromised. It is,
therefore, essential that national security policymakers
consider carefully the value of signals intelligence activities
in light of the risks entailed in conducting these activities.

To enable this judgment, the heads of departments and agencies
that participate in the policy processes for establishing
signals intelligence priorities and requirements shall, on an
annual basis, review any priorities or requirements identified
by their departments or agencies and advise the DNI whether each
should be maintained, with a copy of the advice provided to the
APNSA.

Additionally, the classified Annex to this directive, which
supplements the existing policy process for reviewing signals
intelligence activities, affirms that determinations about
whether and how to conduct signals intelligence activities must

5

carefully evaluate the benefits to our national interests and
the risks posed by those activities.6 * 8

Sec. 4. Safeguarding Personal Information Collected Through
Signals Intelligence.

All persons should be treated with dignity and respect,
regardless of their nationality or wherever they might reside,
and all persons have legitimate privacy interests in the
handling of their personal information. U.S. signals
intelligence activities must, therefore, include appropriate
safeguards for the personal information of all individuals,

regardless of the nationality of the individual to whom the

8

information pertains or where that individual resides.

(a) Policies and Procedures. The DNI, in consultation with
the Attorney General, shall ensure that all elements of
the IC establish policies and procedures that apply the
following principles for safeguarding personal
information collected from signals intelligence
activities. To the maximum extent feasible consistent
with the national security, these policies and procedures
are to be applied equally to the personal information of
all persons, regardless of nationality:9

i.	Minimization. The sharing of intelligence that

contains personal information is necessary to protect
our national security and advance our foreign policy
interests, as it enables the United States to
coordinate activities across our government. At the
same time, however, by setting appropriate limits on
such sharing, the United States takes legitimate
privacy concerns into account and decreases the risks
that personal information will be misused or
mishandled. Relatedly, the significance to our
national security of intelligence is not always
apparent upon an initial review of information:
intelligence must be retained for a sufficient period
of time for the IC to understand its relevance and use

Section 3 of this directive, and the directive's classified Annex, do not
apply to (1) signals intelligence activities undertaken by or for the Federal
Bureau of Investigation in support of predicated investigations other than
those conducted solely for purposes of acquiring foreign intelligence; or (2)
signals intelligence activities undertaken in support of military operations
in an area of active hostilities, covert action, or human intelligence
operations.

Departments and agencies shall apply the term "personal information" in a
manner that is consistent for U.S. persons and non-U.S. persons.
Accordingly, for the purposes of this directive, the term "personal
information" shall cover the same types of information covered by
"information concerning U.S. persons" under section 2.3 of Executive Order
12333.

8 The collection, retention, and dissemination of information concerning
"United States persons" is governed by multiple legal and policy
requirements, such as those required by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Act and Executive Order 12333. For the purposes of this directive, the term
"United States person" shall have the same meaning as it does in Executive
Order 12333.

9 The policies and procedures of affected elements of the IC shall also be
consistent with any additional IC policies, standards, procedures, and
guidance the DNI, in coordination with the Attorney General, the heads of IC
elements, and the heads of any other departments containing such elements,
may issue to implement these principles. This directive is not intended to
alter the rules applicable to U.S. persons in Executive Order 12333, the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, or other applicable law.

6

it to meet our national security needs. However,
long-term storage of personal information unnecessary
to protect our national security is inefficient,
unnecessary, and raises legitimate privacy concerns.
Accordingly, IC elements shall establish policies and
procedures reasonably designed to minimize the
dissemination and retention of personal information
collected from signals intelligence activities.

•	Dissemination :	Personal information shall be

disseminated only if the dissemination of comparable
information concerning U.S. persons would be
permitted under section 2.3 of Executive Order
12333.

•	Retention :	Personal information shall be retained

only if the retention of comparable information
concerning U.S. persons would be permitted under
section 2.3 of Executive Order 12333 and shall be
subject to the same retention periods as applied to
comparable information concerning U.S. persons.
Information for which no such determination has been
made shall not be retained for more than 5 years,
unless the DNI expressly determines that continued
retention is in the national security interests of
the United States.

Additionally, within 180 days of the date of this
directive, the DNI, in coordination with the
Attorney General, the heads of other elements of the
IC, and the heads of departments and agencies
containing other elements of the IC, shall prepare a
report evaluating possible additional dissemination
and retention safeguards for personal information
collected through signals intelligence, consistent
with technical capabilities and operational needs.

ii.	Data Security and Access. When our national security
and foreign policy needs require us to retain certain
intelligence, it is vital that the United States take
appropriate steps to ensure that any personal
information contained within that intelligence is
secure. Accordingly, personal information shall be
processed and stored under conditions that provide
adequate protection and prevent access by unauthorized
persons, consistent with the applicable safeguards for
sensitive information contained in relevant Executive
Orders, proclamations, Presidential directives,

IC directives, and associated policies. Access to
such personal information shall be limited to
authorized personnel with a need to know the
information to perform their mission, consistent with
the personnel security requirements of relevant
Executive Orders, IC directives, and associated
policies. Such personnel will be provided appropriate
and adequate training in the principles set forth in
this directive. These persons may access and use the
information consistent with applicable laws and
Executive Orders and the principles of this directive;
personal information for which no determination has
been made that it can be permissibly disseminated or
retained under section 4(a)(i) of this directive shall
be accessed only in order to make such determinations

7

(or to conduct authorized administrative, security,
and oversight functions).

iii.	Data Quality. IC elements strive to provide national
security policymakers with timely, accurate, and
insightful intelligence, and inaccurate records and
reporting can not only undermine our national security
interests, but also can result in the collection or
analysis of information relating to persons whose
activities are not of foreign intelligence or
counterintelligence value. Accordingly, personal
information shall be included in intelligence products
only as consistent with applicable IC standards for
accuracy and objectivity, as set forth in relevant
IC directives. Moreover, while IC elements should
apply the IC Analytic Standards as a whole, particular
care should be taken to apply standards relating to
the quality and reliability of the information,
consideration of alternative sources of information
and interpretations of data, and objectivity in
performing analysis.

iv.	Oversight. The IC has long recognized that effective
oversight is necessary to ensure that we are
protecting our national security in a manner
consistent with our interests and values.

Accordingly, the policies and procedures of IC
elements, and departments and agencies containing IC
elements, shall include appropriate measures to
facilitate oversight over the implementation of
safeguards protecting personal information, to include
periodic auditing against the standards required by
this section.

The policies and procedures shall also recognize and
facilitate the performance of oversight by the
Inspectors General of IC elements, and departments and
agencies containing IC elements, and other relevant
oversight entities, as appropriate and consistent with
their responsibilities. When a significant compliance
issue occurs involving personal information of any
person, regardless of nationality, collected as a
result of signals intelligence activities, the issue
shall, in addition to any existing reporting
requirements, be reported promptly to the DNI, who
shall determine what, if any, corrective actions are
necessary. If the issue involves a non-United States
person, the DNI, in consultation with the Secretary of
State and the head of the notifying department or
agency, shall determine whether steps should be taken
to notify the relevant foreign government, consistent
with the protection of sources and methods and of U.S.
personnel.

(b) Update and Publication. Within 1 year of the date of
this directive, IC elements shall update or issue new
policies and procedures as necessary to implement
section 4 of this directive, in coordination with the
DNI. To enhance public understanding of, and promote
public trust in, the safeguards in place to protect
personal information, these updated or newly issued
policies and procedures shall be publicly released
to the maximum extent possible, consistent with
classification requirements.

8

(c) Privacy and Civil Liberties Policy Official. To help
ensure that the legitimate privacy interests all people
share related to the handling of their personal
information are appropriately considered in light of the
principles in this section, the APNSA, the Director of
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and the
Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP) shall identify one or more senior officials who
will be responsible for working with the DNI, the
Attorney General, the heads of other elements of the IC,
and the heads of departments and agencies containing
other elements of the IC, as appropriate, as they develop
the policies and procedures called for in this section.

(d)	Coordinator for International Diplomacy. The Secretary
of State shall identify a senior official within the
Department of State to coordinate with the responsible
departments and agencies the United States Government’s
diplomatic and foreign policy efforts related to
international information technology issues and to serve
as a point of contact for foreign governments who wish to
raise concerns regarding signals intelligence activities
conducted by the United States.

Sec. 5. Reports.

(a)	Within 180 days of the date of this directive, the DNI
shall provide a status report that updates me on the
progress of the IC’s implementation of section 4 of this
directive.

(b)	The Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board is
encouraged to provide me with a report that assesses the
implementation of any matters contained within this
directive that fall within its mandate.

(c)	Within 120 days of the date of this directive, the
President’s Intelligence Advisory Board shall provide
me with a report identifying options for assessing
the distinction between metadata and other types of
information, and for replacing the ”need-to-share” or
”need-to-know” models for classified information sharing
with a Work-Related Access model.

(d)	Within 1 year of the date of this directive, the DNI, in
coordination with the heads of relevant elements of the
IC and OSTP, shall provide me with a report assessing the
feasibility of creating software that would allow the IC
more easily to conduct targeted information acquisition
rather than bulk collection.

Sec. 6. General Provisions.

(a) Nothing in this directive shall be construed to prevent

me from exercising my constitutional authority, including
as Commander in Chief, Chief Executive, and in the
conduct of foreign affairs, as well as my statutory
authority. Consistent with this principle, a recipient
of this directive may at any time recommend to me,
through the APNSA, a change to the policies and
procedures contained in this directive.

9

(b) Nothing in this directive shall be construed to
impair or otherwise affect the authority or
responsibility granted by law to a United States
Government department or agency, or the head thereof,
or the functions of the Director of OMB relating to
budgetary, administrative, or legislative proposals.

This directive is intended to supplement existing
processes or procedures for reviewing foreign
intelligence or counterintelligence activities and should
not be read to supersede such processes and procedures
unless explicitly stated.

c)	This directive shall be implemented consistent with
applicable U.S. law and subject to the availability of
appropriations.

d)	This directive is not intended to, and does not, create
any right or benefit, substantive or procedural,
enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the
United States, its departments, agencies, or entities,
its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.

# # #