Nomination of Edward Joseph Snowden for the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize

To the attention of the Norwegian Nobel Committee:

We hereby wish to nominate Mr Edward Joseph Snowden (born 21 June 1983) for the
2014 Nobel Peace Prize for his unique contribution to the advancement of democratic values
and the global consciousness of human interdependency and interconnectedness, which are
conditions for universal peace.

In June 2013, we all discovered the face of a young man, who had overnight become an icon
of state treason for some and a heroic defender of the most basic freedoms for many more.
When he disclosed and published documents on secret services tapping the internet, phone
calls and other communications data, Mr Snowden shed light on the largest and most
systematic privacy violations the “free world” had seen in decades.

A former technical contractor for the US National Security Agency (NSA) and CIA
employee, Mr Snowden leaked thousands of NSA documents revealing deeply intrusive and
illegal programmes of mass phone and internet interception to the UK daily The Guardian in
May 2013, before fleeing to Hong Kong and subsequently being granted temporary asylum in
Russia.

Since the 9/11 tragedy and the initiation of a “Global War on Terror” by successive US
governments and their allies in Europe and elsewhere, some national governments have
grown increasingly intrusive in their handling of security matters. In the name of “peace” and
“security”, many fundamental freedoms, notably freedom of expression and the right to
privacy, are threatened and in some cases even trampled on.

The (ongoing) NSA exposure has had colossal repercussions globally, including initiating
intensive public debates on government secrecy, privacy, data protection, corporate
complicity and on the limits of domestic and foreign surveillance. His act has also triggered
the launch of parliamentary inquiries into the scope and legality of eavesdropping
programmes, the review of the entire US intelligence and communications gathering
technologies, major diplomatic incidents with the grounding and search of the plane of
Bolivian President Morales and serious incidents against basic media freedoms in the United
Kingdom.

In doing so, Mr Snowden took great risks for his own personal safety. He had to leave behind
his career, his country and his loved ones. The violence of some official reactions
demonstrates that he hit a deeply sensitive point in the current practices of many governments
and state organisations. He has truly become, one step farther than his forerunners Julian
Assange and Chelsea Manning, the very face of a major fault in our democratic systems.

His action has immensely contributed to the advancement of democratic values and the
global consciousness of our interdependency and interconnectedness, and hence of
universal peace. And for all those reasons, he deserves the consideration of the
Norwegian Nobel Committee to be honoured for the Nobel Peace Prize.

Yours sincerely,

Why the Nobel Peace Prize for Edward Snowden?

•	To express support to Edward Snowden in his current ordeal and to encourage other
potential whistleblowers to go public to the benefit of all;

•	To recognise that whistle-blowers and investigative journalists can have a significant
impact on the enjoyment of human rights by revealing, at their own considerable risk, the
truth about unacceptable government or corporate practice, and thus may be considered as
human rights defenders and peace advocates

•	To contribute to global consciousness of common interdependency and shared destiny
of humankind, which are conditions for universal peace.

•	To demonstrate that Nobel Peace prizes are not subject to any double standards bias,
after the successive celebration of USA President Obama and the EU, and to acknowledge
that the promotion and respect of human rights, peace and democracy starts at home.