House of Commons
Home Affairs Committee

Counter-terrorism

Seventeenth Report of Session 2013-
14

Report, together with formal minutes and oral
evidence

Ordered by the House of Commons
to be printed 30 April 2014

HC 231

Published on 9 May 2014
by authority of the House of Commons
London: The Stationery Office Limited

£0.00

Home Affairs Committee

The Home Affairs Committee is appointed by the House of Commons to examine
the expenditure, administration, and policy of the Home Office and its
associated public bodies.

Current membership

Rt Hon Keith Vaz MP (Labour, Leicester East) (Chair)

Ian Austin MP (Labour, Dudley North)

Nicola Blackwood MP (Conservative, Oxford West and Abingdon)

James Clappison MP (Conservative, Hertsmere)

Michael Ellis MP (Conservative, Northampton North)

Paul Flynn MP (Labour, Newport West)

Lorraine Fullbrook MP (Conservative, South Ribble)

Dr Julian Huppert MP (Liberal Democrat, Cambridge)

Yasmin Qureshi MP (Labour, Bolton South East)

Mark Reckless MP (Conservative, Rochester and Strood)

Mr David Winnick MP (Labour, Walsall North)

The following Members were also members of the Committee during the
Parliament.

Rt Hon Alun Michael (Labour & Co-operative, Cardiff South and Penarth)

Karl Turner MP (Labour, Kingston upon Hull East)

Steve McCabe MP (Labour, Birmingham Selly Oak)

Bridget Phillipson MP (Labour, Houghton and Sunderland South)

Chris Ruane MP (Labour, Vale of Clwyd)

Powers

The Committee is one of the departmental select committees, the powers of
which are set out in House of Commons Standing Orders, principally in SO No
152. These are available on the Internet via www.parliament.uk.

Publication

Committee reports are published on the Committee's website at
http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-
select/home-affairs-committee/publications/ by The Stationary Office by Order of
the House.

Evidence relating to this report is published on the Committee's website at
http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-
select/home-affairs-committee/inquiries/parliament-2010/co-ordinating-the-
fight-against-international-terrorism/

Committee staff

The current staff of the Committee are Tom Healey (Clerk), Robert Cope (Second
Clerk), Duma Langton (Committee Specialist), Dr Ruth Martin (Committee
Specialist), Eleanor Scarnell (Committee Specialist), Andy Boyd (Senior
Committee Assistant), Iwona Hankin (Committee Assistant) and Alex Paterson
(Select Committee Media Officer).

Contacts

All correspondence should be addressed to the Clerk of the Home Affairs
Committee, House of Commons, 7 Millbank, London SW1P 3JA. The telephone
number for general enquiries is 020 7219 2049; the Committee's email address is
homeaffcom@parliament.uk.

Counter-terrorism 1

Contents

Report	Page

1	Introduction	3

2	Threat Assessment	4

The United Kingdom	5

Global	7

Syria	7

Afghanistan and Pakistan	8

Horn of Africa	9

Yemen	10

North Africa	11

Nigeria	11

3	Foreign Fighters	13

UK nationals fighting in Syria	16

Numbers and the threat posed	16

Response	20

4	Capacity Building	24

UK capacity building	24

Counter Terrorism and Extremism Liaison Officers (CTELOs) Network in action

26

Funding for capacity building	27

The European Union	29

International capacity building efforts	30

5	The UK's response to the terrorist threat	33

Countering terrorist activity	34

Schedule 7	34

Withdrawal of passports	35

Citizenship stripping	36

Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures	38

Countering extremist narratives	48

Countering terrorist financing	49

Charities	50

The proposal to move counter terrorism to the National Crime Agency	52

Partnership in the fight against terrorism	55

6	Oversight of the security and intelligence agencies	57

Parliamentary oversight	57

Judicial and expert oversight	62

Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000	67

The Data Retention Directive and Section 94 of the Telecommunications Act
1984.	68

2 Counter-terrorism

Annex A: Case chronology of Mohammed Ahmed Mohamed

72

Annex B: Comparison of the UK and US oversight systems of the security and

intelligence agencies	74

Legislative oversight	74

Expert oversight	76

Judicial oversight	78

UK system of oversight	79

History	79

Parliamentary accountability	81

Failures of parliamentary accountability	82

Other systems of accountability	86

US system of oversight	89

History	89

Congressional accountability	89

Failures of Congressional accountability	90

Other systems of accountability	91

Comparison	93

Conclusion	96

Conclusions and recommendations	97

Formal Minutes	103

Witnesses	107

Published written evidence	109

List of Reports from the Committee during the current Parliament

111

Counter-terrorism 3

1	Introduction

1.	Since the events of 11 September 2001, UK counter-terrorism policy has changed
immeasurably. The pace of that change was increased again following the events of 7 July
2005. In their written evidence to this inquiry the Government informed us that there had
been six foiled terrorist plots since April 2010.1

2.	However, as the terrorist threat changes and evolves, so too must British counter-
terrorism policy. The changes to the threat are not gradual, they are not predictable and
their solutions are not always obvious. In the past three years the Arab Spring has had an
unforeseeable impact on the threat landscape as there has been an increase in ungoverned
spaces and the large number of foreign fighters who have travelled to Syria, and might have
been indoctrinated to present a threat. Indeed, far from a more benign threat picture,
which we might have been hoped for after thirteen years of intensive counter-terrorism
operations, the situation today seems more complex. The threat from terrorism has
dramatically changed since 2001. Today there are more Al Qa’ida inspired terrorist groups
than in 2001, spread across a wider geography, with a more diverse and evolving set of
capabilities. A common feature among these terrorist groups is that the UK features as a
primary target. We have included a full threat assessment as an annex to this report.

3.	We took evidence on a wide range of issues, focusing primarily on three elements of our
terms of reference for this inquiry:

•	Whether the UK has sufficient capability to detect, investigate and disrupt terrorist
threats.

•	The effectiveness of the Government in working with foreign Governments and Multi-
lateral organisations to counter terrorist threats at home and abroad.

•	Whether the UK effectively supports allies in building capacity to investigate and
prosecute terrorists based overseas.

We would like to thank everyone who assisted us with this inquiry: those who gave
evidence to us; officials from the Kenyan and British Governments who we met in Nairobi;
and Google and YouTube, who hosted a seminar on counter-radicalisation narratives for
us. We would also like to thank our special adviser, Charlie Edwards, of the Royal United
Services Institute.

INQ0007

4 Counter-terrorism

2	Threat Assessment

4.	The threat from terrorism to the UK and its interests overseas is more diverse and
geographically dispersed than it was a decade ago. In a speech to the Royal United Services
Institute (RUSI) in February 2013, the Foreign Secretary said that the greatest terrorist
threat to the UK remained Al Qa’ida and its ideology, and suggested that the nature of the
threat had changed in three principal ways:

First, it is geographically more diverse. We face a determined ‘Al Qaeda core’
in Pakistan and Afghanistan’s border region, and multiple groups inspired by
Al Qaeda in the world’s most fragile regions. Second, the threat is more
fragmented. Al Qaeda does not control a franchise of groups all operating to
the same agenda, however much they would like us to think this. Third,
terrorism today is based even more closely on the exploitation of local and
regional issues. Terrorists are constantly searching out new areas where they
have the greatest freedom to plan external attacks.2

5.	We heard evidence that the threat is not only diversifying in terms of geography — with
Syria becoming the latest battleground for terrorist groups — but in methodology, as
terrorists collaborate and coordinate their actions, both online and offline, sharing
information, skills and expertise. The evolution of the terrorist threat in Syria and the
increasing reality of foreign fighters travelling back to the UK from Syria in order to carry
out an attack on the British mainland is the latest, troubling development.3

6.	While Syria is a priority concern for the Government, the UK still faces a significant
threat from Al Qa'ida (AQ) based along the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan,
groups such as Al Qa'ida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) in Yemen and Al Qa'ida in the
Islamic Maghreb (AQM) in West Africa.

7.	In recent times there have been reminders of the global nature of the terrorist threat and
its ability to impact upon UK interests. The attack on In Amenas, in Algeria, included six
British citizens amongst the 40 dead. Following the attack on the Westgate shopping Mall
in Nairobi (in which six British citizens also died), Al Shabaab, a terrorist group based in
Somalia, remains capable of mounting attacks throughout Kenya and against targets in the
Horn of Africa. The bomb blast in Addis Ababa which killed two people in late 2013 could
be a sign Al Shabaab are beginning to target Ethiopia.

8.	Kidnapping for ransom has become an increasingly common terrorist tactic. Over 150
foreign nationals have been kidnapped by Islamist terrorist groups since 2008 (at least 13 of
whom were British nationals). Numbers kidnapped in 2012 (almost 50) were more than
double those in 2010. In many cases ransoms have been paid, and the British Government

2	ht.tps://www.gov.uk/govemment/speeches/count.ering-t.errorism-overseas

3	Ruth Sherlock, Gaziantep, and Tom Whitehead, Al-Qaeda training British and European 'jihadists' in Syria to set up

terror cells at home, Daily Telegraph, 19 Jan 2014

Counter-terrorism 5

conservatively estimates that AQ affiliates and other extremist groups have collected at
least $60 million in foreign national ransom payments since 2008.

9.	The Government’s CONTEST strategy identifies Afghanistan, Pakistan, Yemen, Somalia
and Nigeria as priority countries for the UK’s counter-terrorism work overseas. The
United States Government’s National Counterterrorism Centre estimates that the number
of terrorist attacks around the world has levelled off following a rapid increase between
2003 and 2008, but the global threat from terrorism remains high.4 According to the
CONTEST Annual Report published in 2014 there were there were nearly 8,500 terrorist
attacks in 85 countries, causing nearly 15,500 fatalities.5

The United Kingdom

10.	According to Home Office figures, between April 2010 and March 2013, 580
individuals were arrested in Great Britain for terrorism-related offences.6 The breakdown
of arrests, along with figures for the past year can be found in the table below.

	Domestic  terrorism	Northern Irish terrorism	International  terrorism	Not Classified	Total
2012-2013	33	4	182	30	249
2010-2013	80	9	446	45	580

From https://www.gov.uk/govemment/publications/operation-of-police-powers-under-the-terrorism-act-2000-

2012-to-2013/operation-of-police-powers-under-the-terrorism-act-2000-and-subsequent-legislation-arrests-

outcomes-and-stop-and-searches-great-britain-2012-to-20

The outcomes of those arrests can be found in the table below.

	Charged				Released	Alternative  action  taken	Total
	Under Terrorism Act 2000	Under Schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act 2000	With  terrorism  offences  under  other  legislation	With  non-  terrorism  related  offences			
2012-2013	31	4	2	68	105	39	249
2010-2013	78	8	12	143	285	54	580

From https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/operation-of-police-powers-under-the-terrorism-act-2000-

2012-to-2013/operation-of-police-powers-under-the-terrorism-act-2000-and-subsequent-legislation-arrests-

outcomes-and-stop-and-searches-great-britain-2012-to-20

11.	David Anderson QC, the Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation, suggested to
us that Jonathan Evans, then Director General of MI5, was not exaggerating when he said
in 2012 that “Britain has experienced a credible terrorist attack about once a year since
9/11.”7 Mr Anderson went on to say:

The will and capacity to commit 7/7 style atrocities in the United Kingdom
may well still exist, as demonstrated by the Birmingham rucksack bomb plot
of 2011. Significant numbers of British citizens have lost their lives abroad

4	CONTEST Annual Report, Home Office, March 2013, Cm 8583

5	CONTEST Annual Report, Home Office, April 2014, Cm 8848

6	INQ0007

7CTF0017

6 Counter-terrorism

this year to terrorism, notably in the Algerian gas plant and Nairobi shopping
mall attacks. In Great Britain, 43 persons were charged with terrorism-
related offences during 2012 - a figure precisely in line with the average since

2001.8

12.	We understand that, in the past few years, the police, security and intelligence agencies
have seen a trend towards 'low signature' terrorism by small, self-directed groups and lone
actors. These individuals or groups develop the intent and capability to conduct attacks
without support or direction from AQ or AQ affiliates.9

13.	We also heard that the police were concerned with so-called 'self-starters': individuals
who radicalise themselves (often over the internet) and plan attacks independently. Their
attack methods tend to be simple, requiring little money or technical ability, and detecting
and disrupting such threats is therefore a significant challenge.10 An example of such an
attack occurred last year when Pavlo Lapshyn, a Ukrainian student, was convicted of
murdering an 82-year-old man and planning to cause explosions near mosques in racist
attacks.11

14.	Many of the trends outlined above have been identified by Government. The
CONTEST strategy included the following series of planning assumptions:

•	The death of Osama bin Laden will further damage the operational capability of Al
Qa’ida in Pakistan and Afghanistan. Continued international pressure will make it
harder for the Al Qa’ida senior leadership to plan and conduct terrorist attacks. Al
Qa’ida will try to exploit the withdrawal of western forces from Afghanistan.

•	Al Qa’ida affiliates may continue to grow, taking advantage of state fragility and failure.
They will all aspire to attack western targets. The Al Qa’ida senior leadership will try to
guide and direct its affiliates but will not exert close control: Al Qa’ida will continue to
become less of an organisation and more of a movement.

•	A wider range of Al Qa’ida inspired terrorist networks, groups and unaffiliated
individuals will collaborate to launch attacks against the West, sharing resources and
capabilities.

•	Current political and social change in the Middle East and North Africa has
undermined the credibility of Al Qa’ida and like-minded terrorist groups and may
continue to do so; but terrorist groups will try to adapt their propaganda and will
exploit uncertainty and instability in the region.

•	The process of radicalisation will continue: the ideology which has come to be
associated with Al Qa’ida will be more resilient than Al Qa’ida itself. Extremist material

8CTE0017

9	CONTEST: The United Kingdom's Strategy for Countering Terrorism, July 2011, Cm 8123

10	INQ0007

11	Mosque bomber Pavlo Lapshyn given life for murder, 25 October 2013, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-

birmingham-24675040

Counter-terrorism 7

on the internet will continue to motivate some people to engage in terrorism but will
rarely be a substitute for the social process of radicalisation.

•	Terrorist groups will use a range of attack techniques, both established and new. There
will be more cyber terrorism. Groups will continue to benefit from off-the-shelf
technology in planning and conducting attacks, making operations more secure and
potentially more lethal. The internet and virtual space will be strategically vital.

•	Organisations will seek to conduct attacks which cause mass casualties or otherwise
have visible mass disruptive impact. Al Qa’ida and other groups will maintain their
long-term interest in using chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear materials.

•	Geographically, vital countries for our counter-terrorism work will continue to be
Afghanistan and Pakistan, Yemen, Somalia and Nigeria.

•	Some states will continue to support terrorist groups to try to protect their own
strategic interests.

•	Terrorists in Northern Ireland will continue to conduct attacks in an attempt to reverse
the peace process. Some groups will aspire to conduct attacks inside Great Britain.

•	There will continue to be isolated individuals who engage in terrorist activity in the
name of extreme right or left-wing views or other ideologies. They will not pose as high
a risk to our national security as terrorism associated with Al Qa’ida.12

15.	We asked Charles Farr, the Director General of the Office for Security and Counter

Terrorism whether he was satisfied with the planning assumptions two years on. He

replied:

I	am satisfied that our planning assumptions in 2011 continue to be relevant.
They do not mention Syria specifically though they do refer to the likely
increase in activity by Al Qa’ida affiliates and their exploitation of instability
in the Middle East. Syria of course reflects these broad trends.13

Global

Syria

16.	Syria is the current theatre of choice for foreign fighters, something which should be of
great concern for EU Member States, given the country’s proximity to Europe, and ease of
travel to its main cities. Dr Thomas Hegghammer, Director of Terrorism Research at The
Norwegian Defence Research Establishment, suggested that while there are not strong
signals of a concerted effort by terrorist groups on the ground in Syria to target the West:

12	CONTEST: The United Kingdom's Strategy for Countering Terrorism, July 2011, Cm 8123

13	INQ0010

8 Counter-terrorism

There have been some indications in the past six months that such a change
might happen...Those indications include statements and threats by foreign
fighters in Syria—including British ones—and reports conveyed by
intelligence officials, like James Clapper in the US, that dominant groups in
Syria have now established training camps dedicated to the grooming of
operatives in the west.14

Dr Hegghammer went on to say that foreign fighters in Syria were present in
unprecedented numbers:

No other conflict in the Muslim world in recent history has attracted the
same number that we are now seeing in Syria. The best estimates we have
speak of 2,000 Europeans in Syria, which I believe is more than the total
number of European foreign fighters in all previous conflict zones
combined.15

17.	The potential threat was confirmed by Mr Farr, when he suggested the UK faces the
threat of a terrorist attack from Syria-based groups which may make use of foreign fighters
(including British citizens).16 Further on in this report, we discuss the position over UK
citizens travelling to Syria to assist in the fighting.

Afghanistan and Pakistan

18.	While Syria is the focus of much attention, there remains a significant terrorism threat
emanating from the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan and the Government
recognises the threat from terrorist groups operating in the tribal areas along the Afghan
border. This has long been a priority for our national security.

19.	Although Al Qa’ida is much reduced in number, it continues to operate from this
region and still has the capability to conduct terrorist attacks in the UK and other
countries. The leadership of Al Qa’ida (based in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas of
Pakistan) has been severely weakened by operations conducted by the Pakistan
Government. However British citizens still travel to the region and return to the UK to
conduct attacks. We cannot afford to allow the considerable coverage of the Syrian conflict
to distract us from the threat posed by extremists within this region. As the Government
notes:

Operational capability of Al Qa’ida’s leadership is now less than at any time
since 11 September 2001. Many have been killed, captured, or dispersed.
Communications, training and planning have been significantly disrupted.
Al Qa’ida’s senior leadership has been forced to rely more on other terrorist

14	Q566

15	Q554

16	Q187

Counter-terrorism 9

groups for operational support and has increasingly called for extremists to
conduct independent attacks without further guidance or instruction.17

Horn of Africa

20.	The appalling September 2013 attack on the Westgate Mall in Nairobi, Kenya
demonstrated the intent and capability of Al Shabaab, the Somali terrorist group. The
attack in Nairobi is the most serious act of terrorism in Kenya since Islamist extremists
attacked the US Embassy in 1998, but it is by no means an isolated event in the region. We
visited the Westgate Mall during, accompanied by a British police officer based in Nairobi,
and were horrified at the devastation which had been wrought by a very small group of
people, using simple, inexpensive technology.

21.	The recent shooting of Sheikh Abubakar Shariff is likely to undermine community
relations in some areas of Kenya. His death follows similar shootings in Mombasa and the
storming of Musa Mosque in the city, during which at least eight people were killed
(including a policeman) and Kenyan Police arrested 129 people, including children. Many
of the suspects have been released following public condemnation.

22.	In Somalia, some progress has been made by the Somali Government in containing the
threat posed by Al Shabaab however these are fragile gains. Al Shabaab remains capable of
mounting attacks throughout the country, collaborating with other terrorist organisations
(such as AQAP in Yemen) and aspires to attack targets in the region, including UK
interests. Al-Shabaab conducted over 30 attacks - including 10 suicide bombings - in 2010
alone.18

23.	In 2012 the terrorist group launched fewer attacks but remained in control of a
substantial area of South Central Somalia. However, 2013 saw an increase in the number of
attacks and in April, approximately thirty people were killed when Al-Shabaab stormed
Mogadishu's main court complex, while in early September explosions at ‘The Village’, a
restaurant near the Parliament building in Mogadishu, killed fifteen people. We
understand that while the African Union-led military offensive in Somalia has been
successful in targeting Al-Shabaab, the terrorist group continues to try and establish
networks outside the country - both in Kenya and Tanzania.

24.	Al-Shabaab uses a combination of conventional and asymmetric tactics - these include
‘religious police’ who employ violent punishments, the use of automatic weapons, suicide
bombers and improvised explosive devices (IEDs). The group employs radio and online
communication to publicise its message and further funding and recruitment drives. In
addition to recruitment of foreign-born suicide bombers, there has also been growth of
home-grown religious extremists through local recruitment and radicalisation efforts.
Terrorism and violent extremism in the region is growing increasingly complex. Reports of

17	CONTEST: The United Kingdom's Strategy for Countering Terrorism, July 2011, Cm 8123

18	CONTFST Annual Report, March 2013, HM Government, Cm 8583

10 Counter-terrorism

a steady stream of recruits travelling to Somalia from Western Kenya and Tanzania are
concerning.

25.	There are also concerns regarding the travel of British extremists to the region
attempting to link up with Al Shabaab or other, related, extremist groups. The May 2013
murder of Fusilier Lee Rigby was carried out by an individual who had travelled to the
region several times and was suspected of trying to join Al Shabaab. We visited Kenya as
part of this inquiry to examine the links between the UK and Kenyan counter-terrorism
personnel and to examine the capacity building work which was being carried out there.

Yemen

26.	Al Qa’ida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP)’s main area of activity is within Yemen
where it continues with a campaign of attacks against the Yemeni Government and
supportive countries. It also continues to conduct operations against both internal and
western diplomatic targets in Yemen. Kidnappings for ransom are commonplace, and
tribal groups may attempt to sell hostages to AQAP.

27.	In the past few years, AQAP are estimated to have made $15-20 million through
kidnap and ransom. A number of UK diplomats have been attacked. Despite a partially
successful counter-terrorism campaign by the Government, AQAP continues to pose a
significant threat both to the UK and to UK interests in the region.

28.	AQAP propaganda, in the shape of Inspire - an online magazine - has continued to
encourage acts of lone terrorism against the West. In April 2012, AQAP attempted a third
attack on a civilian aircraft. AQAP are not coordinated by the AQ leadership and are seen
by analysts as more technically astute than other AQ affiliated groups. They remain a key
concern for UK national security.

29.	At the start of the Arab Spring, AQAP improved infrastructure in some areas by
connecting towns to electricity grid, putting teachers in school and playing a governmental
role. However, their popularity waned following a level of brutality imposed their leaders.
Despite this, intercepted communications between AQAP and AQM in Mali during the
incursion there emphasised the importance of winning the hearts and mind of the people
and gave advice to AQM leaders on organising rubbish collections and ensuring access to
electricity.19

30.	AQAP is responsible for the production of Inspire, the English language magazine
which is frequently found in the possession of self-organised groups planning attacks in the
UK. Its key messages include an emphasis on promoting attacks in the West, specifically
lone actor style attacks. One of the alleged Boston bombers, Dzhokar Tsarnaev, stated that
he and his brother T amerlan had access to a copy of Inspire.

31.	AQAP also has a track record of attempting to carry out sophisticated terrorist attacks
in the West. AQAP has demonstrated the capability to produce IEDs aimed at defeating

19 CONTFST: The United Kingdom's Strategy for Countering Terrorism, July 2011, Cm 8123

Counter-terrorism 11

aviation security, and there is a continuing risk that a successful attack against an aeroplane
could happen with little or no warning. These include the ‘underpants bomber’ and the
‘printer cartridge plot’.

North Africa

32.	There has been a sharp increase in terrorist activity in the region conducted by Al
Qa’ida in the Maghreb (AQM). AQM has its origins in Algeria, where the majority of its
attacks to date have been directed. However, following the Arab Spring, AQM benefited
from the deterioration in the security situation in the area - particularly in Libya - to
increase its geographical reach, add to its arsenal of weapons and attract recruits to its
cause. We remain very concerned that some analysts have described Libya as a large
warehouse full of weapons with the doors wide open.

33.	Smaller, affiliated organisations are also active. AQ-related groups are now stronger in
Libya, Egypt and Tunisia than ever before and have greater freedom of movement. The
attack on the gas installation at In Amenas in Algeria in January 2013 demonstrates the
current capability and intent of terrorist groups in the region.

34.	AQM has kidnapped and ransomed western hostages, securing significant funds for
further operational activity; AQM has moved south into Mali and provides practical
support to the Nigerian militant Islamist group - Boko Haram. The group has constantly
exploited the freedom of movement afforded to it in the largely unpoliced desert areas of
the Sahel.

35.	The French-led intervention in Mali has removed this control and pushed AQM into
more remote areas. The threat of attacks from AQM elements is however likely to endure
in the region for the foreseeable future.

Nigeria

36.	In Nigeria the Islamist extremist group Boko Haram has carried out a violent
campaign, largely in the north of the country, often aimed at Christian communities and
places of worship, as well as against Nigerian governmental and official targets. A second
Nigerian jihadist organisation, Ansaru, is an offshoot of this group although it is worth
noting the groups have separate ethnic identities - Boko Haram is mainly Kanuri whereas
Ansaru is Hausa.

37.	Boko Haram is conducting a large scale insurgency in Nigeria. There are almost daily
attacks in Nigeria, causing large numbers of fatalities. Its splinter group. Ansaru, has a
more international agenda and has kidnapped and murdered western (including British)
hostages. Boko Haram and extended its reach into the volatile region of northern Nigeria.

38.	Ansaru is widely associated with carrying out kidnap for ransom. There are many links
between terrorist groups and drug trafficking in North-West Africa. In many cases, drugs
will arrive on the West Coast and will be transported northwards by terrorist groups who
take advantage of the porous borders in the region. There are also reports that smugglers

12 Counter-terrorism

have been adopting a religious or jihadist rhetoric in order to justify their fight against the
security services. A number of criminal organisations in Mali have adopted a separatist
stance to ‘legitimise’ themselves.

Counter-terrorism 13

3	Foreign Fighters

39.	Citizens of western countries travelling abroad to take part in foreign conflicts has been
an area of concern as far back as the 1590s, when Guy Fawkes returned from fighting with
the Spanish in the Eighty Years’ War. More recently, British citizens have participated in
the Afghan and Bosnian wars. In his July 2013 report, David Anderson QC, the
Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation highlighted the threat posed by British
nationals joining extremist organisations abroad.

The travel of UK nationals overseas to engage in jihad presents a number of
potential threats to the UK, both while these fighters are overseas and on
their return to the UK. The nature of these threats can differ, depending on
the country in which they are fighting or the terrorist group which is hosting
them, but there are a number of common themes. While overseas, these
fighters can help terrorist groups develop their external attack capability by
providing links with extremist networks in the UK and information about
potential targets and the operating environment. In addition to English
language skills which can help these groups with media outreach, some
foreign fighters may also have other specialist skills (e.g. scientific, IT) that
can help to strengthen the capability of these groups. The intelligence
services have also seen foreign fighters attempt to direct operations against
UK interests abroad.20

40.	In September 2013, US Congressman Peter King, former Chair of the House
Homeland Security Committee, highlighted the extent of the current problem and the
reason it raised concern amongst Western security agencies in his evidence to this inquiry.

As recent events have demonstrated, one of the most significant challenges
facing Western states in the fight against al Qaeda is stemming the flow of
foreign fighters who attempt to fight alongside al Qaeda's affiliates in Syria,
Somalia, Yemen, and other parts of the world. ... The willingness to travel to
terror safe havens and join violent Islamist extremist groups, even when these
attempts are unsuccessful, should be considered an indicator that these
individuals are capable of carrying out attacks in their home countries, as in
the case of the Woolwich attackers, one of who reportedly attempted to join
al Shabaab in 2010, and in the case of Tamerlan Tsarnaev. Some reports
suggest that Tsarnaev's travel to Russia in early 2012 was an attempt to meet
with violent extremists in the Caucuses. Both of these individuals would
return home and subsequently murder innocent victims in the name of

jihad.21

These concerns are corroborated by an analysis carried out by Dr Thomas Hegghammer
which found that on average, one in nine foreign fighters returned home to take part in a

20 https://terrorismleoislationreviewer.independent.oov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Report-on-the-Terronsm-Acts-in-

2012-FINAL WEB1.pdf, p29

21 INQ0013

14 Counter-terrorism

domestic terror plot. He found that plots with foreign fighters are more likely to reach
fruition and twice as likely to have a lethal impact. He noted that

a one-in-nine radicalisation rate would make foreign fighter experience one
of the strongest predictors of individual involvement in domestic operations
that we know. The predictive power of other biographic variables—whether
nationality, economic status, or any other biographical trait studied so far—
does not come close.22

41.	There is recent evidence of UK citizens having fought in both Somalia and Yemen as
well as a number of nationals fighting in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas of
Pakistan. David Anderson QC found that previous travel to the Federally Administered
Tribal Areas for extremist training has been a feature of a number of terrorist plots in the
UK, including four of the five plots disrupted in 2010-2012.23 However, the numbers of
foreigners fighting in each of these arenas has been dwarfed by those that are now
travelling to take part in the Syrian civil war.

42.	The uprising in Syria has involved many organisations with different political views
and tactics; some are connected with and supported by Al Qa’ida. The conflict in Syria has
drawn extremists on both sides; whilst instability across that region has provided new
ungoverned spaces for terrorists to operate in. Trends in the conflict have reflected both
diversification and profusion of armed groups and improvement in the size and
capabilities of some actors relative to others. Many groups and units who claim to
coordinate under various fronts and coalitions in fact appear to operate independently and
reserve the right to change allegiances.24 We took evidence from a broad range of people
both inside and outside of the British Government on the threat from foreign fighters
travelling to Syria.

43.	Few, if any, Governments or Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) can accurately
and independently verify the size, equipment, and current areas of operation of terrorist
groups operating in Syria. While there is much good work going on both inside and
outside of Government to understand the conflict dynamics and the implications for
security in Syria, the region and more widely, we should be cautious in accepting hard
numbers without appropriate evidence. A report by the Congressional Research Service
suggests that:

open source analysis of armed groups operating in Syria relies largely on the
self-reporting of individual groups and coalitions. Information is not evenly
and regularly available for all groups. Verification is imperfect and is based
on independent analysis of self-reported and third party-reported
information. Social media outlets and news reports can help verify

22	Thomas Hegghammer 'Should I stay or should I go? Explaining Variation in Western Jihadists' Choice between

Domestic and Foreign Fighting' American Political Science Review 107, February 2013

23	https://terrorismlegislationreviewer.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Report-on-the-Terrorism-Acts-in-

2012-FINAL WEB1.pdf, p29

24	Armed Conflict in Syria: Overview and U.S. Response, Congressional Research Service, January 1 5, 2014

Counter-terrorism 15

information, but most analysts consider it to be very difficult to confirm data
points.25

44.	The sheer complexity of the security environment in Syria should not be
underestimated. There are hundreds of active militia forces, ranging in size from a few
dozen to thousands and organized around a wide variety of local communities, ethnic and
religious identities, and political-religious ideologies. The size and relative strength of
groups have varied and will continue to vary by location and time.26

45.	The International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation (ICSR) estimates that - from
late 2011 to 10 December 2013 - between 3,300 and 11,000 individuals have gone to Syria
to fight against the Assad government. Based on the credibility of various sources, and the
think tank’s own judgement, they believe the “true” figure to be above 8,500. A number of
examples have been brought to our attention including:

Two Dutch returnees from Syria who are understood to have been involved
in youth criminal gangs prior to their travel were part of a five-person cell
arrested last month for planning an armed robbery in the Netherlands. Genc
Selimi, a 19-year-old Kosovar, was one of the six arrested for plotting a
terrorist attack on a major European city after he returned from a stint in
Syria. Prior to leaving for the conflict, he had been arrested in 2012 for gun
possession... The one plot that has publicly emerged in any detail in the UK is
the cell that had allegedly come back with plans to launch a Mumbai-style
attack, though it is unclear that they had secured any weapons.27

The ICSR estimate that the number of fighters from Western Europe ranges from 396 to
1,937. Western Europeans now represent up to 18 per cent of the foreign fighter
population in Syria, with most recruits coming from France (63-412), Britain (43-366),
Germany, (34-240), Belgium (76-296), and the Netherlands (29-152). Adjusting for
population size, the most heavily affected countries are Belgium (up to 27 foreign fighters
per million), Denmark (15), the Netherlands (9), Sweden (9), Norway (8), and Austria

(7).28

25 Armed Conflict in Syria: Overview and U.S. Response, Congressional Research Service, January 1 5, 2014

26 Armed Conflict in Syria: Overview and U.S. Response, Congressional Research Service, January 1 5, 2014

27	https://www.rusi.org/analvsis/commentarv/ref:C533931D971E60/#.Uz6YYle8 KA

28	http://icsr.info/2013/12/icsr-insight-11000-foreign-fighters-syria-steep-rise-among-western-europeans/

16 Counter-terrorism

500

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

Estimates of Western European Foreign Fighters in Syria

co

3

<

£

3

O)

CD

00

CD

E

c

CD

Q

Low estimate

I I High estimate

£

o

■o

O)

c

"O
0
-<—<

C

3

UK nationals fighting in Syria

Numbers and the threat posed

46.	Syria is an extremely attractive destination for foreign fighters. It is described as a
‘perfect storm’ in regards to foreign fighters as it is

•	easily accessible (via either a three-day drive across Europe and through Turkey to the
northern Syria border or a low-cost flight to Turkey and then a short drive to the
border);

•	has a sectarian element;

•	has a viable narrative in regards to fighting against a perceived tyrant, widely criticised
by Western leaders: and,

•	is close to jihadist conflicts in Iraq and Lebanon which means that fighters are kept
well-supplied.

47.	It is not just European foreign fighters who are travelling to Syria to take part in the
war. There are reports that foreign fighters from North Africa and the Middle East make
up almost 70% of the up to 11,000 fighters which some estimate to be fighting on behalf of
the opposition.29

29 http://icsr.info/2013/1 2/icsr-insight-11000-foreian-fiaht.ers-svria-steep-rise-amona-west.ern-europeans/

Counter-terrorism 17

Estimates of Middle Eastern Foreign Fighters in Syria

2500 ---------------------------------------------------------------

Low estimate I I High estimate	5

There are also believed to be close to 10,000 foreigners fighting on behalf of the
Government although the majority of these are thought to have been sent by the regimes in
Iran and Lebanon.30

48.	When we questioned our witnesses about the motivation of those wishing to travel to
Syria to fight the regime, humanitarian reasons were highlighted as a key motivator31 as
was the Muslim concept of ‘ummah’ which was described as

the idea that all Muslims around the world are united through some kind of
fraternity of the faithful and that Muslims from one part of the world owe
duty, allegiance and loyalty to other Muslims, particularly in times of
oppression or injustice.32

It was also emphasised that this conflict was viewed as a fight against a tyrant and therefore
the actions of those fighting him were morally correct. This is a feeling that could well be
reinforced by the attempts made by both the UK and US Governments to undertake
military action against the Assad regime. Other witnesses ascribed less noble motivations
towards those fighting in Syria with the EU Counter-Terrorism coordinator describing
them as narcissists who wanted their picture taken with a Kalashnikov.33 Another witness,
Dr Thomas Hegghammer, told us that as well as those who travelled for humanitarian
reasons, some had travelled primarily with the objective of wanting to build a sharia state
whereas others might have travelled for the kind of social dimension which we might more
readily associate with a gap year student than a fighter.

30	http://carneaieendowment.ora/svriaincrisis/?fa=53811

31	Q434; 470

32	Q488

33	Q516

18 Counter-terrorism

[T]he search for camaraderie; the joy and excitement of adventure; the
pleasure of doing something with your life; making a difference: all that kind
of thing.34

49.	Dr Hegghammer noted there were now more European foreign fighters in Syria than
had fought in all previous conflict zones combined.35 This in itself raised concerns as even
if the rate of returning foreign fighters engaging in domestic terrorism was much less than
he had previously estimated, the large number made it likely that such a threat was likely.36
The threat posed by the British citizens or residents fighting in Syria was set out by Charles
Farr, the Director General of the Office for Security and Counter-Terrorism.

Some of those people may pose a threat when—if I take Syria as an
example—they get to Syria and they may, from their base in Syria, plot
attacks back in the UK. Others may pose a threat to us when they travel back
from Syria themselves and they plan attacks here, either under the
instruction of people outside this country or at their own initiative. Foreign
fighters, so called, in this particular case British residents or nationals, pose a
threat in a variety of different ways to us.37

50.	This was elaborated on by Gilles de Kerchove, who told us that the large number of
jihadists travelling to Syria meant that the foreign fighters will now have had training in
how to use a weapon or to build a bomb and also have contact points with other jihadists
from around the world and even those travelling for humanitarian reasons were likely to be
indoctrinated.38 Shiraz Maher, senior fellow at the International Centre for the Study of
Radicalisation also highlighted the danger of the indoctrination of those with humanitarian
motivations.

People who may well go into Syria for all the right reasons, as you say, who
are motivated by purely humanitarian intentions, are not just of course
fighting 24 hours a day on the front lines. They spend a lot of time being
indoctrinated and going to study groups and so on. What we find from the
ones we are talking to is certainly that if they had not embraced what you
might describe as a global jihadist ideology before arriving in the country,
they are certainly beginning to embrace that while they are out there, so that
encompasses a lot of ideas that I think do make them certainly more
dangerous than they would have been.39

51.	However, not everyone agreed that foreign fighters were as much as a threat as might
have been suggested. Richard Barrett told us that some may have returned horrified by
what they saw rather than with the intention of carrying an attack out on their own
country - he suggested that a qualitative assessment would have to be carried out on

34	Q570

35	Q554

36	Q561

37	Q187

38	Q512

39	Q484

Counter-terrorism 19

returnees before such a judgement could be made about the threat that they posed.40 It was
also pointed out to us by several witnesses that the rate of attack upon return of foreign
fighters varies across different conflicts. Foreign fighters who have trained in Afghanistan
or Pakistan (where there are organisations with the stated objective of attacking the West)
are much more likely to engage in planning an attack than those who travelled to Iraq
where there was not the same degree of hostility against the West.41 At present, the
motivation of those fighting in the Syrian civil war is sectarian—Sunni against Shia—with
no group openly advocating action against the West, although it was also noted that this
could change in the future.42

52.	Given the lack of perceived hostility against the West, many people have viewed those
fighting in the Syrian Civil War as synonymous with those who travelled to take part in the
Spanish Civil War. When we asked Dr Hegghammer why British citizens fighting in the
Syrian civil war should be viewed differently to British citizens fighting in the Spanish Civil
War he told us

The difference between the Islamist foreign fighter phenomenon today and a
war like the Spanish Civil War is that today there are many cases of people
moving on from this foreign fighter activity to international terrorism
involving attacks against civilians in western cities. You did not have that at
the time. There was not this sort of frequent and smooth transition from
guerrilla warfare within the conflict at stake to more transnational terrorist
operations. Whatever we think about the moral justification behind the
initial involvement in the war, I think the reality that a substantial number of
people move on to international terrorism from this activity should merit
certain policy measures to prevent just that kind of violence.43

The role of transnational terrorist operations in the war was also a point of concern for
both Nigel Inkster of the International Institute for Strategic Studies (ISSD) and Shiraz
Maher of the ICSR. Nigel Inkster told us that

For me, the real worry about Syria is that it has the potential to become the
crucible for a new generation of international jihadists, rather in the way as
happened with those who took part in the anti-Soviet jihad in the 1980s, that
they become a kind of band of brothers, united by shared experiences, shared
outlooks, shared ideology, and that they then move on looking for new forms
of jihad to undertake, one of which could well consist of attacks in countries
such as the UK.44

Shiraz Maher described the effect of war in Syria being that the gains made in the battle
against international terrorist groups following the 11 September attacks were being

40	Q692

41	Q473; 558

42	Q568

43	Q560

44	Q473

20 Counter-terrorism

reversed. As a result of the Syrian battlefields acting as a permissive environment these
organisations were able to repopulate their networks in ungoverned territory in a way that
would have been unthinkable even two years prior.45 Dr Hegghammer supported this
concern, noting that there are now more jihadist groups across the Middle East than there
were at the time of 9/11 and that we were seeing a new generation of militants being
trained which would lead to the phenomenon of Islamic terrorism being extended by at
least 15 to 20 years.46

Response

53.	The phenomenon of British foreign fighters in Syria has only recently begun to be
perceived as major threat to the UK.47 Indeed, it had not yet become significant enough to
be included in the Home Office’s submission to our call for evidence in October 2013
despite one of the terms of reference being ‘the monitoring of those linked to terrorist
activities, both at home and abroad’. By our first oral evidence session on 12 November,
Charles Farr identified Syria as the most important area in terms of identifying and
monitoring people who were travelling to fight in areas of jihad.48 Both the Home Secretary
and Assistant Commissioner Cressida Dick highlighted the difficulty of identifying those
who were travelling to engage in jihad as opposed to those who were travelling for
humanitarian reasons49 (although, as noted above, even those with humanitarian
motivations may eventually become radicalised).

54.	In the first fortnight of 2014, fourteen people were arrested in relation to Syrian-linked
activities. This was in comparison to the 24 people arrested over the course of the
preceding year. A month later, on 16 February 2014, The Sunday Times reported that as
many as 250 individuals who had fought in Syria had now returned to the UK. In an
interview later that day, the Immigration and Security Minister did not dispute the figure,
stating that the security concern linked with Syria was likely to be an issue for the
foreseeable future.50

55.	In terms of preventing travel, the Immigration and Security Minister set out the range
of legislative options that were available to the police and security service.

Depending on the intelligence or evidential case there are existing laws that
can assist in the prevention of travel. However, it is important to highlight
that where intelligence is limited we may be unable to meet the required
thresholds for exercising powers available to us. Clearly where there is strong
intelligence or evidence, powers of arrest under TACT 2000 can be used in
order to investigate terrorist offences and establish whether individuals are

45	Q481

46	Q574

47	http://www.standard.co.uk/news/crime/exclusive-antrterrorism-chief-warns-of-british-airls-inspired-bv-iihad-

9080110.html

48	Q186

49	Oral evidence taken on 16 December 2013, The work of the Home Secretary, HC 235-iii (2013-14), Q204; Q365

50	http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-26214793

Counter-terrorism 21

engaged in the commission, preparation and instigation of acts of terrorism.

In addition those seeking to travel may also reach the arrest threshold for
criminal offences; such arrests may prevent or disrupt travel. In terms of
specific legislation aimed at curbing travel the following are most relevant at
this time; TPIMs, foreign travel restriction orders, the Royal Prerogative,
deportation, exclusion and deprivation. TPIMs require a strong national
security case. Foreign travel restriction orders are available in relation to
convicted terrorists who have received a sentence of imprisonment of more
than 12 months.51

However, he also noted that in terms of people returning from Syria, each case had to be
considered individually as not everyone who returned will have been engaged with a
terrorist organisation. He emphasised that in order for a case to be prosecuted, both
sufficient evidence to convict and a public interest in the prosecution would be required.52
The necessity of treating cases individually was also a point made by Gilles de Kerchove
who told us that the EU was designing

mechanisms to assess—and I think this will be necessary for each and every
returnee—whether this person poses a threat, and whether they need
psychological support, because many have been confronted with a really ugly
war, or social support to help them get back to normal life, to find a job or to
retrain for that.53

56.	Gilles de Kerchove also set out the wider EU response to the concern which consisted
of:

•	Collating information on those travelling to fight in an attempt to understand whether
there were networks involved, who was travelling, what routes they were taking, how
they were being funded and what their motivations were.

•	T rying to stem the flow of foreign fighters.

•	Ensuring that there is an adequate legal framework to investigate and prosecute those
who have joined the most radical groups.

•	Maximising existing processes such as the Schengen Information System and exploring
new processes such as passenger name records.

•	Engaging collectively with transit countries.

Using these objectives as a starting point, he told us that a ‘concrete project’ was being put

together.54

51	CTE0032

52	Q876

53	Q512

54	Q508-9

22 Counter-terrorism

57.	A number of witnesses had other suggestions for dealing with the concern raised by the
issue of foreign fighters. The Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police noted that in a
number of cases the parents of those who had travelled to fight were unsure of where they
could access advice or information to allow them to stop it. He also suggested that more
work could be done with mosque leaders.55 In his evidence before us, Gilles de Kerchove
suggested that testimony of the returnees could be used to highlight the infighting between
the groups and the terrible experiences of those who have fought in the war.56 The
Immigration and Security Minister made reference to the importance of emphasising the
fact that the Free Syrian Army (and indeed the Syrian people) have said that they want
humanitarian assistance rather than foreign fighters.57 On a practical note, Dr
Hegghammer suggested that external partners could work with Turkish authorities to
increase their capacity at the border, a project which may be as simple as building a fence.58

58.	The number of UK citizens and Westerners travelling to fight in foreign conflicts
has reached alarming levels unlike anything seen in recent years. We require an
immediate response targeted at dissuading and preventing those who wish to go to
fight from going; helping countries who are key to intercepting those who are entering
Syria, and ensuring those who return do not present a danger to the UK.

59.	We are alarmed by the relative ease by which foreign fighters appear to be able to
cross the border into Syria. It is the responsibility of the international community to
assist transit countries, and the UK must offer practical support to those countries in
securing their borders. We have been impressed by the efforts made to prevent football
hooliganism in foreign countries by sending “spotters” to help pick out those at risk of
committing criminal acts and believe similar practical help would be beneficial in the
fight against terrorism. We recommend that the Government maintain representation
from the UK Counter Terrorism command to help the Turkish authorities identify
those who are at risk of crossing the border into Syria intending to fight and make
available any relevant intelligence to the Turkish authorities that may be beneficial. The
Government should also work with transit countries such as Turkey, Lebanon and
Jordan to better establish who is likely to be travelling for genuine humanitarian
reasons.

60.	The Government needs a clear strategy for dealing with foreign fighters on their
return, which may include help to come to terms with the violence they have witnessed
and participated in, as well as counter-radicalisation interventions. We are concerned
that their experiences may well make them vulnerable to Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder thereby increasing their vulnerability to radicalisation. We recommend that
the Government implement a programme, similar to Channel, for everyone returning
to Britain where there is evidence that they have fought in Syria. The engagement in
this strategy should be linked to any legal penalties imposed on their return. In

55	Q368

56	Q518

57	Q873

58	Q560

Counter-terrorism 23

developing the strategy the Government must work with mental health practitioners
and academia to ensure that the programme best integrates those returning from
conflict zones such as Syria.

24 Counter-terrorism

4	Capacity Building

61.	In her foreword to the July 2011 Contest Strategy, the Home Secretary noted that

Most of the terrorist plots against this country continue to have very
significant overseas connections. We must continue to work closely with
other countries and multilateral organisations to tackle the threats we face at
their source.59

UK capacity building

62.	While the police, security and intelligence agencies work tirelessly to protect British
citizens we believe that building stability overseas is also crucial to the success of the
Government’s counter-terrorism strategy. As the CONTEST strategy makes clear:

Terrorist groups gravitate to and emerge from fragile and failed states...the
absence of the effective rule of law not only encourages terrorism, but makes
counter-terrorism operations significantly harder. In some cases, terrorists
who we know and who are planning operations in this country have been
able to do so without hindrance for many years. Building the capacity of
failed and fragile states is therefore vital to our national security.60

63.	This work is delivered through political and diplomatic engagement, and through
specific counter-terrorism projects in priority countries: Afghanistan, Pakistan, Yemen,
Somalia and Nigeria. Syria, in recent years, has also become a priority.

64.	The Government also uses its international development programme to gain
maximum benefit in stabilising areas which in turn restricts the growth of extremism.
Governments are not the sole providers of capacity building projects - NGOs play an
important role in countering terrorism. The UN provided an example of their work to
develop effective and proportionate strategies to prevent terrorism financing through
NGOs. The project, launched in London in 2011 with the support of the Government of
the United Kingdom, was supported by Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States and brought together more than
60 countries and 80 NGOs to examine the risks. Experts from the United Kingdom,
including the Charity Commission of England and Wales, played a leading role in the
organisation and implementation of this initiative, which the UN maintain provided
invaluable guidance and policy advice.61

65.	In their written evidence to us the Home Office said that the Government had
introduced a more strategic approach to developing the capacity of international partners
to investigate and prosecute terrorists by building justice and human rights partnerships.

59	CONTEST: The United Kingdom's Strategy for Countering Terrorism, July 2011, Cm 8123

60	Ibid.

61 CTF0035

Counter-terrorism 25

The work was being carried out with countries where there is both a threat to UK security
and weaknesses in the law enforcement, human rights and criminal justice architecture.

66.	Specific counter-terrorist projects are supported by a £30m FCO CT Programme.
These projects are delivered by and with a range of Departments and agencies, including
the Ministry of Defence, Department for Transport, Crown Prosecution Service and the
Metropolitan Police Service.62 These projects aim to:

•	Build the CT capacity of overseas security services to improve compliance with the law
and human rights and to make them more effective;

•	Improve the ability of local investigators to build cases based on evidence rather than
confession. The police CT network plays a critical role in this regard: support is
delivered through the network of Counter-Terrorism and Extremism Liaison Officers
(CTELOs) posted overseas who work with organisations in their host countries and
regions;

•	Ensure prosecutors and judges are capable of processing terrorism cases through the
court systems, effectively, fairly and in line with the rule of law;

•	Improve and where appropriate monitor conditions in detention facilities so that
convicted terrorists can be held securely and their treatment meets with international
standards.63

67.	The Government emphasised that capacity building work overseas were carried out
within a framework built on accountability and respect for human rights and that

It is vital that our CT work supports justice and the rule of law as well as
meeting our security objectives. Although work on the partnerships is in its
early stages, we have already delivered progress in a range of areas.64

68.	The police provide an important role in capacity building overseas. In her written
evidence to us, Cressida Dick, the Assistant Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police
explained how the police counter-terrorism network played a critical role in supporting
countries overseas to investigate and prosecute terrorists who may threaten the UK and
our interests. She told us that the Metropolitan Police’s Counter Terrorism and Extremism
Liaison Officers (CTELOs) are strategically located around the world and work closely with
police counterparts in their host countries and regions. They have a wide range of roles and
responsibilities including:

•	providing assistance in efficiently progressing CT-related enquiries emanating from,
and directed into, the UK (this includes working within Europol);

62	CONTEST: The United Kingdom's Strategy for Countering Terrorism, July 2011, Cm 8123

63	INQ0007

64 Ibid.

26 Counter-terrorism

•	acting as the forward deployment for UK CT police in respect of terrorist incidents
where UK nationals or interests are involved to assist the host country in conducting
their investigation;

•	mentoring and building effective and human-rights-compliant CT capability within
foreign police agencies in support of the FCO Justice and Human Rights Partnership
(JHRP) Programme.65

69.	The network of Counter Terrorism and Extremism Liaison Officers (CTELOs) has
recently increased its geographical coverage in response to the expanding and more
diversified threat overseas. According to the Metropolitan Police, it is now more effectively
placed to deliver the policing component of the Government’s upstream counter-terrorism
operations so that it is possible to tackle the threat at its source and better establish where
there is a direct threat to the UK or its interests.66

70.	The Metropolitan Police highlighted the relationship between CTELOs and NCA
colleagues where the two organisations have common posts. Furthermore the
Metropolitan Police described how the CT Network is

Actively engaged with the NCA in examining potential areas of coordination
and collaboration and some of these overlaps may well be identified in
capacity building activity, specifically where we are interacting with the same
organizations overseas.67

Counter Terrorism and Extremism Liaison Officers (CTELOs) Network in
action

71.	The Metropolitan Police gave two recent examples of their CTELOs supporting
national law enforcement in investigating terrorist incidents abroad.

Algeria

The Counter Terrorist Command in the MPS led the UK response following
the terrorist attack on a gas plant processing facility in In Amenas, Algeria in
January. This is an ongoing operation, with extensive support being provided
by us to the Foreign Office and the HM Coroner and there continues to be
significant family liaison work and engagement with a range of international
partners. The deployed team were able to manage the recovery, identification
and repatriation of any UK deceased, conduct interviews and evidence
gathering from survivors.

Led by the Forensic Management Team, the UK set a strategy for the
international identification and repatriation of deceased and their remains,
managing all aspects of the mortuary process. With the assistance of

65	INQ0003

66	CTE0031

67 Ibid

Counter-terrorism 27

international partners from Norway and Japan, the team examined a high
number of bodies and body parts, conducting all DNA work here in the UK.
This process enabled the repatriation of UK and other international victims
and all associated body parts to UK Coronial standards. The mortuary
process allowed the UK team to support local authorities through the
Disaster Victim Identification (DVI) process with the sharing of best practice
and the training of local staff. In addition, officers were able to visit the scene
and gain an insight into the events of this attack in order to support the
coroner.

Kenya

Following the attack on the Westgate shopping centre, the CTELO had been
heavily engaged with the Kenyan police response. The decision was taken to
deploy a Counter Terrorism Command team of investigators in order to
assist the Kenyan police investigation and mentor local resources in the
effective examination of a terrorism scene, along with all the issues associated
with body recovery to an internationally approved standard.

The CTELO has an extremely good relationship with the Anti-Terrorist
Police Unit and this allowed the investigation team access to relevant
material and allowed for the team to assist local staff with scene examination
and body recovery. Previous training has been delivered to the Kenyan police
by the Counter Terrorism Command but this was their first major scene.
Working alongside the Kenyan police, with the assistance of FBI colleagues,
the team were able to mentor them through all aspects of scene management,
scene investigation and body recovery. This included mortuary management
in mass fatality terrorist attacks.68

Funding for capacity building

72.	Given evidence presented as to the increasingly diverse and dispersed nature of the
threat and its impact on the UK and our interests overseas, capacity building is a vital tool
in influencing and shaping the international response to terrorism. In his evidence to us
Richard Barrett emphasised:

Capacity building in some areas I think is very important. I think it is very
important to encourage people to act by the rule of law and so on, of course,
building capacity overseas from the point of apprehension to the point of
verdict, if you like, so that the treatment is correct. A terrorist, after all, sees
the state as his enemy, and therefore if the enemy is responding to the
terrorist in a way that they would respond to any citizen, that slightly
undermines the narrative. We know, of course, of examples of people who
have been rather surprised by their treatment by Government in a positive
way, which has tended to de-radicalise them. Similarly, of course, if you treat

68 INQ0003

28 Counter-terrorism

people badly, they become more radicalised. I think capacity building just in
the sense of awareness and understanding is enormously important.69

73.	One of the more troubling aspects of capacity building is knowing how effective they
are. Richard Barrett argued “that absolutely every effort should be made to measure the
impact, because after all you are talking about taxpayers’ pounds, and this should be spent
responsibly.”70 However, he also noted that capacity building is not a straightforward
process and neither is measuring the impact. He told us:

It is very difficult to say whether something was effective or not, and I think
the more you can get your funds into the hands of local partners who are
working on the ground in the community and measure what happens as a
result of that work, clearly the better. That means you are not spending £30
million, but you are spending maybe £30,000, because there are community
groups who cannot absorb huge amounts of money. Then there are all sorts
of knock-on effects about administrative costs and everything else.”71

74.	On a recent trip to India, the Prime Minister indicated that he was willing to see the
UK’s spending on international aid be used to

make sure that the funds we have at our disposal are used to provide basic
levels of stability and security in deeply broken and fragile states ... We have
our moral responsibilities for tackling poverty in the world. We also have
national security responsibilities for mending conflict states and helping with
development around the world and we should see DfID in that context.72

It was suggested that funding could be diverted to Ministry of Defence projects as a result.

75.	The increasingly diverse and dispersed nature of the threat makes capacity building
a front-line defence against a changing threat landscape. We note that the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office’s budget is limited by available resources but given the
importance of capacity building to the Government’s counter-terrorism efforts we look
to the OSCT and the FCO to reassure us that the Counter-Terrorism Fund will be
maintained at current levels in this and the next financial year. In the light of the
announcement that the Prime Minister is considering using some of the UK’s aid
budget on peace keeping and other defence-related projects, we recommend that within
the definitions of Overseas Development Aid, money could be used to increase resource
for capacity building abroad.

76.	Jean-Paul Laborde, Executive Director UN Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) highlighted that such work is also done through the UN. CTED
conducts work in collaboration with its partners within and outside the UN system. It
works with them to develop the appropriate tools and methodologies to measure the

69	Q700

70	Q691-722

71	Q703

72	http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-polit.ics-21528464

Counter-terrorism 29

impact of the work that CTED and its partners are undertaking in order to ensure that
counter-terrorism measures are effectively deployed.73 The nature of such capacity
building support will vary depending on the context but will include: training and
mentoring local CT police units in evidence based investigations, interviewing and forensic
techniques, where an emphasis is placed upon the importance of human rights compliant
processes and safeguards to deliver reliable and viable prosecutions.74

77.	We asked the Government for details of its capacity building projects. The response we
received was that the UK Government

Do not publicly disclose the location, number or purpose of all our counter
terrorist capacity building projects overseas because they very often have a
counter terrorist operational purpose.75

The only programme it was willing to provide specific details upon was the CAPRI
(Counter-Terrorism Associated Prosecutorial Reform Initiative) project in Pakistan which
has the overall objective of supporting national capacity in the fight against terrorism and
organised crime networks. However, we understand that despite the Government
informing us that CAPRI is part of the FCO’s Justice and Human Rights Partnership
Programme, it is in fact funded by the European Commission. The project is indeed being
carried out by the UK but is funded entirely from European budgets.

78.	We accept that some of the UK’s capacity building programmes are sensitive but we
believe that greater transparency about how much the Government spends on capacity
building overseas and who funds these programmes (i.e. fully by UK Government or
jointly between UK and EU) is crucial for accountability.

The European Union

79.	In his evidence to the committee, Gilles de Kerchove, the EU’s Counter-Terrorism
Coordinator, painted a worrying picture. Mr de Kerchove said that national budgets
devoted to counter-terrorism are declining across the EU but that

the threat that we face is becoming more diverse, more diffuse, and more
unpredictable.76

Mr de Kerchove was particularly concerned about Africa where he suggested the threat was
growing and becoming a major obstacle to development.

80.	In his evidence to us, Mr Laborde of CTED said that

All States have had to make cut-backs in their own expenditure. However,
CTED, like its partners, works hard to “do more with less” by developing

73	CTE0035

74	CTE0031

75	INQ0010

76	CTF0034

30 Counter-terrorism

capacity building projects that are designed in very practical ways to
maximize the use of resources. These include the implementation of regional
approaches, in which capacity-building addresses the needs of a number of
countries at once.77

In order to respond to the changing threat picture governments will have to increasingly
identify pools of funding and coordinate their action not least if national budgets are in
decline. Furthermore there is anecdotal evidence that there was substantial duplication of
effort and therefore and EU member states could be better joined up in their actions.

81.	In many cases focusing solely on Counter-Terrorism will not be enough and should be
part of a broader and more comprehensive security and development strategy. The EU has
set up a number of programmes where it works to build capacity and ensure that responses
to terrorist activity are in line with the rule of law. A full list of these programmes can be
found in the written evidence provided by the EU’s Counter-Terrorism Coordinator.78 For
reference, two of the programmes are described below:

•	CT Sahel: 8,696,750€, 36 months (10/2011 - 10/2014), Mali, Mauritania and Niger,
with possible extensions to Burkina Faso and Senegal. The aim of the project is to
strengthen the capacities of law enforcement (police, gendarmerie and garde nationale)
and judiciary in the Sahel to fight against terrorism and organised crime with the
purpose to support the progressive development of regional and international
cooperation against these threats.

•	CT Pakistan (CAPRI): 1,800,000€, 36 months (01/2013 - 12/2015). The overall
objective is to support national capacity in the fight against terrorism and organised
crime networks. The purpose of the action is to improve the ability of Punjabi agencies
to successfully investigate, prosecute, convict and detain terrorists. The project is being
carried out by the UK.79

International capacity building efforts

82.	In his evidence to us Jean-Paul Laborde, Executive Director, UN Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate spoke of capacity building as a key plank of international
cooperation and its importance to achieving national and international security.

The transfer of know-how, through capacity-building programmes, and
technical assistance and training on identified areas of need, from high
capacity countries to lower capacity countries, and through the activities of
multilateral agencies, such as those of the United Nations, not only builds
capacity where required, but also identifies best practices, and creates

77	CTE0035

78	CTE0034

79 CTF00.34

Counter-terrorism 31

regional and international networks of specialists and fosters the habits of
cooperation at the working level.80

83.	Mr Laborde echoed previous witness by highlighting the need for capacity building
projects to be coordinated. There is no doubt that CTED plays an important role in regular
convening donors and providers for briefings on capacity building needs in particular
States or regions but proper coordination of activity is limited on the international stage
and does seem to translate to action on the ground. Given national budgets are in decline,
the necessity to act in unison and collaborate between states is more important than ever.

84.	One way that states can act in unison is by supplying and utilising the information
databases held by multi-lateral law enforcement organisations such as Interpol. One of the
key databases collated by Interpol is the Stolen and Lost Travel Documents database.
Whilst its use by the UK authorities is extensive—it was checked 140 million times last year
with 16,000 travel documents identified as not being valid—amongst other countries,
including European allies, its use is not as widespread. The table below shows the number
of time it was checked last year by the most frequent users of the database.

		% of  searches of database
Country	Number of searches	
UNITED STATES	238 389 094	29%
UNITED KINGDOM	140 184 265	18%
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES	104 076 060	13%
JAPAN	34 712 623	4%
CROATIA	34 131 673	4%
SINGAPORE	29 271 045	4%
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA	18 672 539	2%
SERBIA	18 646 856	2%
SWITZERLAND	17 259 652	3%
BULGARIA	15 408 808	1%
CARICOM	15 094 026	2%
QATAR	12 000 981	2%
FRANCE	11 587 347	1%
EL SALVADOR	10 472 105	1%
ALBANIA	10 214 658	1%
MONTENEGRO	8 465 312	1%
OMAN	7 811 925	1%
ROMANIA	6 574 033	1%
CÔTE D'IVOIRE	6 473 294	>1%
PERU	6 179 778	1%
Other		8%

Source: Interpol

85.	Today the terrorist threat is a global one and an attack anywhere in the World has the
capability to harm UK citizens and UK interests. We recommend that the Government
raise the issue of Interpol databases as part of discussions around counter-terrorism at

80 CTE0035

32 Counter-terrorism

the next EU Justice and Home Affairs Council and encourage others to utilise the tools
at their disposal.

86.	Interpol also carry out capacity building projects as well as supporting national law
enforcement agencies in criminal cases which involve an international aspect. At present
Interpol can deploy their incident response teams to a suspected terrorist incident within
24 hours. However, there are suggestions that INTERPOL support to agencies would be
greatly increased should a proposal go ahead to develop an International Mobile Platform
to assist in the investigation of suspected terrorist incidents. Such a platform would
facilitate the records of individuals to be cross-checked across all of the national security
databases of INTERPOL member countries as well as share or compare information and
intelligence with national security units around the globe. It is envisioned that the platform
would only be used in large-scale incidents where multiple nationalities are involved. The
platform would require both resources and support from member countries as it will
comprise highly trained and equipped teams that can support first responders in the
affected country and assist that country conduct sensitive and complex transnational
investigations. In order to be effective, it would have to be based in a permanent command
control centre with teams able to deploy to the affected region.

87.	Interpol is an international policing organisation with a proven record of success
and should be widely supported. We recommend that the Government take the lead in
working with Interpol and the UK’s international partners to create an international
operational platform supporting terrorist investigations. The UK should use its pivotal
position in the G7 to ensure that this change is achieved. Whilst UK policing may lack
sufficient resources to supply a significant number of staff to such a platform, we also
recommend the Government consider offering to host the permanent base of the
platform.

Counter-terrorism 33

5	The UK's response to the terrorist
threat

88.	Terrorist plots and acts of terrorism are investigated by the police and the security and
intelligence agencies. Government funding for counter-terrorism policing was £573
million in 2012-13. The security and intelligence agencies receive a budget of £2.1 billion.
In 2011-12 MI5 allocated 72% of its resources to international counter-terrorism whereas
MI6 and GCHQ allocated roughly a third each of their budgets to international counter-
terrorism.81

89.	The current UK threat level is substantial, having been downgraded from severe in July
2011. That means that an attack is a strong possibility. Since its inception in 2006, the
threat level was either severe or critical up until July 2009 when it was listed as substantial.
It was upgraded to severe in January 2010 before the July 2011 downgrade.82 This latter
period has coincided with a liberalisation in terrorism laws following a review of Counter-
Terrorism legislation carried out by the coalition Government. David Anderson QC
welcomed the changes since 2010 in his written evidence to this inquiry.

Over the past few years, the anti-terrorism laws and their operation have
been cautiously liberalised in areas ranging from stop and search and
retention of biometric data to detention periods and control orders. In
successive reports I have found the liberalisation - but also the caution - to
be justified. I have pointed to gaps in protection, though it is often difficult to
do so publicly. I have also made recommendations for further change. A few
such recommendations (for example the possibility of bail for those arrested
under the Terrorism Act 2000) have been rejected, at least for now. Others
have been partially adopted or are currently in train: in particular, the review
and amendment of Schedule 7 port powers and the revocation of outdated
and potentially unlawful proscription orders.83

90.	Acts of terrorism are not generally charged under terrorist legislation - the perpetrators
of the attack of Fusilier Lee Rigby and the man responsible for the death of Mohammed
Saleem were both charged with (and convicted of) murder rather than a terrorist offence
although both cases were investigated as terrorism. Instead terrorism legislation is intended
to prevent both radicalisation (which can lead to acts of terrorism) and acts of terrorism
themselves. The purpose of terrorism legislation is to

• Ensure that what are known as ‘prior acts’ (such as preparation, training,
dissemination, possession for terrorist purposes and even encouragement) are
criminalised, and

81	Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation, The Terrorism Acts in 2012, July 2013, p46

82	Ibid., p34

83	CTE0017

34 Counter-terrorism

•	To criminalise individuals who may have known about the intentions of terrorists
(non-disclosure to the police or being present during training).84

There is also a degree of associated legislation which can be used to disrupt terrorist action.
In this inquiry we have mainly focused on the effectiveness of the UK counter-terrorism
policy and legislation which can be used to disrupt the activities of foreign fighters. In this
chapter we also discuss the possible transfer of counter-terrorism policing from the
Metropolitan Police to the National Crime Agency.

Countering terrorist activity
Schedule 7

91.	Schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act 2000 empowers police, immigration officers and
designated customs officers to stop and question travellers at ports, airports, or hover ports
in order to ascertain whether they are a terrorist, which for this purpose means “a person
who is or has been concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of
terrorism”.85 There is no requirement that the officer have reasonable grounds for
suspicion that the person is involved in terrorism before the powers can be exercised. The
person being questioned can be

•	detained for questioning for up to 6 hours;

•	required to answer questions and provide information and documents on pain of
criminal penalty; and,

•	searched, as can any property they have on them (including personal electronic devices
such as laptop computers, tablets and mobile phones). That property can be seized and
retained for examination.

Failure to comply with any duties or requests is a criminal offence, punishable by
imprisonment for up to 3 months. The powers are used on a considerable scale
(approximately 60,000 stops a year86) and, according to the EHRC, the ethnic breakdown
of those subjected to the power suggests a statistical disproportionality in terms of race.87

92.	There has been further controversy following the use of schedule 7 to detain David
Miranda at Heathrow Airport in August 2013. Mr Miranda is the partner of Guardian
journalist Glenn Greenwald (the author of the Guardian newspaper stories based on
classified intelligence material leaked by Edward Snowden). He was in transit at Heathrow
airport on his way from Berlin to Rio de Janeiro when he was detained and questioned for
9 hours. His electronic devices were seized and detained by the police as the devices were

84	Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation, The Terrorism Acts in 2012, July 2013, p121

85	http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2000/11/section/40

86	Q112

87	http://www.equalitvhumanrights.com/uploaded files/Consultation responses/ehrc -

review of the operation of schedule 7 consultation response 6 dec 2012.pdf

Counter-terrorism 35

understood to contain material provided by Mr Snowden to the Guardian, including some

58,000	classified UK intelligence documents.88 Following his detention, Mr Miranda
brought a judicial review of the decision to detain him under schedule 7 which was
dismissed in February 2014 (although he has publicly stated his intention to appeal against
the decision.).89 The Miranda judicial review is one of a number of legal challenges to
Schedule 7 which have been brought and a number of changes to the process have been
incorporated in the Anti-Social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014. The amendments
include a statutory review of the detention at regular intervals, the introduction of a code of
practice and safeguards on the retention of electronic data.

93.	The Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation (who reports annually on the use
of schedule 7) had previously been intending to report on the use of schedule 7 to detain
David Miranda at Heathrow Airport in August 2013. Following the outcome of legal
proceedings brought by Mr Miranda against the decision to detain him under schedule 7
and the Royal Assent of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act in March 2014,
Mr Anderson has decided to not to issue such a report. Instead he will include any
recommendations in his annual report which will likely be published in July 2014.90 Mr
Anderson raised a number of issues in evidence to us which were not dealt with in the Act,
specifically:

•	An introduction of a test of grounds of suspicion when ancillary powers are used (such
as detention or making copies of material found on the person);

•	The use of answers given under compulsion in a criminal court; and

•	The treatment of legally privileged material, excluded material and special procedure
material.91

We believe that all of these issues should be subject to further review and we await Mr
Anderson’s report.

Withdrawal of passports

94.	In April 2013, the Home Secretary made a Written Ministerial Statement to the House
which announced a change in the rules allowing the Home Secretary to prove that it was
‘undesirable’ for such a person to have a British passport as opposed to ‘demonstrably
undesirable’. The statement contained the commitment to use the power ‘sparingly’.92 It
also included the following reference to its purposes for countering terrorism.

For example, passport facilities may be refused to or withdrawn from British
nationals who may seek to harm the UK or its allies by travelling on a British

88	https://www.iudiciarv.aov.uk/Resources/JCO/Documents/Judaments/miranda-v-sofshd.pdf

89	http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-26256544

90	https://terrorismleaislationreviewer.independent.aov.uk/miranda-and-the-definition-of-terrorism/

91	Q122; CTE0018

92	HC Deb, 25 Apr 2013: Col 68WS

36 Counter-terrorism

passport to, for example, engage in terrorism-related activity or other serious
or organised criminal activity. This may include individuals who seek to
engage in fighting, extremist activity or terrorist training outside the United
Kingdom, for example, and then return to the UK with enhanced capabilities
that they then use to conduct an attack on UK soil. The need to disrupt
people who travel for these purposes has become increasingly apparent with
developments in various parts of the world.93

95.	In the past the use of the power has been thought to have been rare. It was reported to
have been used only 16 times between 1947 and 1976. It was also reported to have been
used in 2005 following the return from Guantanamo Bay of Martin Mubanga, Feroz
Abbasi, Richard Belmar and Moazzam Begg,94 However, because it is a royal prerogative
there is no requirement for the Home Office to report its use to Parliament. When he gave
evidence to us on the 18 March 2014, the Immigration and Security Minister informed the
Committee that the Royal Prerogative had been used 14 times since April 2013. He told us
that none of those who have had their passport removed have challenged the decision by
way of judicial review.95 He also repeated the commitment to the Royal Prerogative being
used proportionately, in the public interest and sparingly.96

96.	The withdrawal of passports is a vital tool in preventing UK citizens from travelling
to foreign conflicts. We understand the need to use the prerogative power to withdraw
or withhold a citizen’s passport. Given that the estimates of foreign fighters are in the
low hundreds, we are surprised that it has only been used 14 times since April 2013 and
recommend that, in all appropriate circumstances where there is evidence, the power is
utilised as an exceptional preventative and temporary measure. However, we note that
its use is not subject to any scrutiny external to the executive. We recommend that the
Home Secretary report quarterly on its use to the House as is currently done with
TPIMs and allow the Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation to review the
exercise of the Royal Prerogative as part of his annual review.

Citizenship stripping

97.	Another method to address the issue of British citizens (with dual citizenship) fighting
in Syria is removing their British citizenship. Using powers in the British Nationality Act,
the Home Secretary can terminate the British citizenship of dual-nationality individuals if
she believes their presence in the UK is ‘not conducive to the public good’, or if they have
obtained their citizenship through fraud. Deprivation of citizenship orders can be made
with no judicial approval in advance, and take immediate effect - the only route for people
to argue their case is through legal appeals. When we took evidence from the Immigration
and Security Minister he informed us that deprivation of citizenship orders had been made

93	HC Deb, 25 Apr 2013: Col 68WS

94	http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-22297436

95	Q854-5

96	Q867

Counter-terrorism 37

in 41 cases since 2010 - 24 on non-conducive grounds and 17 on fraud grounds. He
refused to specify how many cases were linked to Syria.97

98.	At present, only dual nationals can have their British citizenship withdrawn. However,
there is currently legislation being debated which would allow a naturalised mono-British
national to have their citizenship removed (which would make them stateless) if it

is conducive to the public good because the person, while having that
citizenship status, has conducted him or herself in a manner which is
seriously prejudicial to the vital interests of the United Kingdom, any of the
Islands, or any British overseas territory.98

In such cases, the Government maintains, the individual can attempt to (re)acquire an
alternative nationality.

99.	In a Westminster Hall debate on the subject, the Immigration and Security Minister
noted that the power would be used ‘sparingly’ but emphasised that deprivation of
citizenship would be imposed even if the individual could not obtain alternative
nationality. If the individual were in the UK and unable to obtain alternative nationality,
they could apply to remain in the UK as a stateless person. He noted that

The UK would continue to comply with the provisions of the 1961 UN
convention on the reduction of statelessness, regarding the rights of stateless
persons. Where appropriate, we could regularise a person’s position in the
UK by granting limited leave—possibly with conditions relating to access to
public funds and their right to work and study.99

We were surprised when the Minister informed us that the policy approach had been based
on a single case (the Al-Jedda case) and that the focus had been on individuals who would
be able to apply for alternative nationality. Mr Al-Jedda is not currently in the UK, hence
the Minister’s apparent lack of concern, but the legislation would seem to have no
discernible outcome were it used against someone whilst they were in the UK.

100.	On Monday 7 April the House of Lords voted to amend the Immigration Bill to
further investigate the efficacy of the policy. The House voted to replace the clause with the
following text.

(1)	A committee of members of both Houses of Parliament shall be
established to consider and report on whether section 40 of the British
Nationality Act 1981 (deprivation of citizenship) should be amended to
enable the Secretary of State to deprive a person of their citizenship status
if—

(a)	the citizenship status results from the person’s naturalisation, and

97	Q870-1

98	HC Deb, 30 Jan 2014: Col 1026

99	HC Deb, 11 Feb 2014: Col 257WH

38 Counter-terrorism

(b)	the Secretary of State is satisfied that the deprivation is conducive to the
public good because the person, while having that citizenship status, has
conducted him or herself in a manner which is seriously prejudicial to the
vital interests of the United Kingdom, any of the Islands, or any British
overseas territory,

even if to do so would have the effect of making a person stateless.

(2)	The committee shall consist of six members of the House of Lords
nominated by the Chairman of Committees, and six members of the House
of Commons nominated by the Speaker of the House of Commons, to be
appointed on the passing of this Act to serve for the duration of the present
Parliament.

(3)	Any casual vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or
incapacity of a member of the committee shall be filled by the nomination of
a member by the Chairman of Committees or the Speaker of the House of
Commons, as the case may be.

(4)	The quorum of the committee shall be two members of each House and
the committee shall be entitled to sit and to transact business whether
Parliament be sitting or not, and notwithstanding a vacancy in the
membership of the committee.

(5)	Subject to the above provisions, the committee may regulate its own
procedure.100

We welcome the decision to constitute a joint committee to look at the proposal to strip
the citizenship of naturalised citizenship. We hope that one of the issues will examine is the
impact making a person stateless whilst they are in the United Kingdom.

101.	We have grave concerns about how effective the deprivation of mono-citizenship
powers will be. Drafting legislation on the basis of an individual case lessens the impact
of the legislation because the exact circumstances are unlikely to repeat themselves. We
support the Minister’s commitment to the power being used sparingly. We recommend
that the Government endeavour to use the power only when the person subject to the
decision is outside the UK.

Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures

102.	Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures (TPIMs) were introduced in
January 2012 as the successor to control orders.101 TPIMs are used by the Government to
monitor and restrict the actions of those who are suspected of terrorist-related activity but
who cannot be prosecuted or deported. The Home Secretary is responsible for the decision
to make an individual subject to a TPIM order, but subject to the prior approval of the

100	HL Deb, 7 Apr 2014: Col 1167

101	The Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Act 2011, which repealed in its entirety the Prevention of

Terrorism Act 2005

Counter-terrorism 39

court, except in urgent cases, where the court must consider the TPIM notice within seven
days of it being issued. The subject is not permitted to participate in these hearings directly,
but his or her interests are represented by a special advocate appointed (in England and
Wales) by the Attorney General. The special advocate is not responsible to the person
whose interests he or she is appointed to represent.

103.	A TPIM notice may be made by the Secretary of State only if the following five
conditions are satisfied:

•	The Secretary of State must reasonably believe that the individual is or has been
involved in terrorism-related activity, as very broadly defined (“Condition A”);

•	Some or all of that activity must be “new” (“Condition B”), though in the case of a first
TPIM to be imposed on a given subject, this condition is always met since activity
occurring at any time is deemed to be “new”.

•	The Secretary of State must reasonably consider that it is necessary, for purposes
connected with protecting members of the public (whether in the UK or overseas) from
a risk of terrorism, for TPIMs to be imposed on the individual (“Condition C”);

•	The Secretary of State must reasonably consider that it is necessary, for purposes
connected with preventing or restricting the individual’s involvement in terrorism-
related activity, for the specified TPIMs to be imposed on the individual (“Condition
D”);

•	The High Court must give prior permission for the TPIM notice to be imposed, such
permission to be withheld when the decisions of the Secretary of State on Conditions
A-D are “obviously flawed”, save in urgent cases where permission may be obtained
retrospectively (“Condition E”).102

104.	Given that two of those subject to TPIMs have absconded (Ibrahim Magag absconded
on 26 December 2012 and Mohammed Ahmed Mohamed on 1 November 2013), one has
been revoked whilst the subject is in prison and that the remaining TPIMs expired by 10
February 2014103, we feel that it is a subject worth examining in more detail. There are
currently no active TPIMs. TPIM subjects in 2013 were subject to restrictions which
included overnight residence at a specified address, GPS tagging, reporting requirements,
and restrictions on travel, movement, association, communication, finances, work and
study.104

105.	TPIM notices expire after a year, and may be renewed for a maximum of one further
year. The TPIMs imposed at the start of 2012 expired, after the single permitted extension,
in early 2014. This means that people who have been judged by the Home Secretary and by

102	Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures in 2012, First Report of The Independent Reviewer on the Operation

of the Terrorism Prevention And Investigation Measures Act 2011 (March 2013) (hereafter, "TPIMs report 2012"), p
19

103	Ibid., p2

104	Ibid., p19-20

40 Counter-terrorism

the courts to be potentially dangerous are now, unless they are prosecuted or new evidence
of terrorism-related activity is found, free from restrictions.

The difference between control orders and TPIMs

106.	In his 2012 report on TPIMs, David Anderson QC, the Independent Reviewer of
Terrorism Legislation included a table which set out the difference between control orders
and TPIMs.

	Control orders	TPIMs
Legal Test	Legal test for imposition of control order: reasonable suspicion of involvement in terrorism-related activity; order must be necessary to protect the public.	Legal test for imposition of TPIM notice: reasonable belief of involvement in terrorism- related activity; measures must be necessary to protect the public.
Duration	Order lasted maximum of 12 months. Renewable if necessary to protect the public; no maximum number of renewals where necessity test satisfied. Orders in place in a small number of cases for over 4 years.	Order lasts maximum of 12 months extendable once, giving maximum time limit of 2 years. Evidence of further engagement in terrorism- related activity required to justify a further notice beyond 2 years.
Obligations  (general)	Any obligation to protect the public could be imposed where judged necessary and proportionate to disrupt terrorism-related activity. (The obligations were not set out in detail on the face of the legislation.)	A narrower range of measures - described in detail on the face of the Act - can be imposed where judged necessary and proportionate to disrupt terrorism-related activity
Curfew / Overnight residence requirement / Residence requirement	Maximum curfews of up to 16 hours for non-derogating control orders with electronic tagging available to monitor compliance.	A requirement to reside overnight at a specified residence (most TPIM notice specify 10 hours) - with limited stays at other locations possible. Electronic tagging available to monitor compliance.
Relocation	Option to relocate individuals to Home Office provided accommodation - potentially several hours travel away from current residence.	No power to relocate away from local area without agreement. A power to provide alternative accommodation within the locality of the home address.
Communication	Option to have complete prohibition of access to mobile phones, computers and the internet (and associated technology/equipment).	All individuals have a right to use one mobile phone without internet access and one landline telephone. All individuals will be able to have access to the internet through one home computer. Use of equipment will be subject to necessary controls e.g. regular inspection and notification of passwords.
Association	Option to prohibit association with any named individuals where necessary. And option to	Option to prohibit association with named individuals retained. Association with any

Counter-terrorism 41

	Control orders	TPIMs
	prohibit association without permission with anyone other than named individuals and specified descriptions of persons.	other person requires notification. (Policy intention is that notification will be required on the first occasion (and will be unrestricted on subsequent occasions)).
Work/study	Option to require notification and/or approval of work and study.	Option retained.
Boundary	Option to impose a very restrictive geographical boundary - limiting the individual to a relatively narrow area and excluding him from areas of significant concern. Option to impose a limit on entry to one of more mosques.	No geographical boundaries. Power to exclude from particular places - streets or specified areas or towns - or descriptions of places (e.g. airports, specified mosques).
Travel abroad	Option to prohibit travel abroad.	Option to prohibit travel abroad without permission of Secretary of State.
Police reporting	Option to require daily reporting to the police.	Option retained
Financial	Option to place restrictions on use of financial services and transfers of property and requirements to disclose details of property.	Option retained.
Renewal	Annual renewal of Act	Renewal of Act every five years
Derogation	Derogating control orders possible - if Government was to derogate from Article 5 (right to liberty) of the European Convention on Human Rights - imposing 24 hour curfew (house arrest).	No power orders.
Prospects of prosecution	Police must keep prospects of prosecution under review, consulting CPS as necessary	Police must keep prospects of prosecution under review, consulting CPS as necessary. Police under statutory duty to inform Home Office of outcome.

Source: TPIMs report 2012, Pg. 102

107.	The Quilliam Foundation noted that

The Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Act 2011 is a welcome
amendment that repeals and replaces the Control Orders in the Prevention of
Terrorism Act 2005. It thereby ensures greater compatibility with the ECHR
and less intrusion on the human rights of the individuals subject to them
than the previous control orders, particularly in reference to the potential
forced relocation and indefinite length of the control orders that have now
both been written out of the revised TPIM legislation. However there remain
several significant problems with TPIMs that mean they are inconsistent with
a clear human rights-based counter-extremism strategy.105

105 CTF0027

42 Counter-terrorism

Cerie Bullivant, who was subject to a control order between 2006 and 2008, told us that he
saw very little difference between the two. Although he welcomed the abolition of the
power to relocate subjects and the two-year limit on the duration of a TPIM, he told us that
life under each order would be exactly the same.106 The Quilliam Foundation suggested
that one way of improving TPIMs would be to have an additional element that comprises
de-radicalisation, rehabilitation and reintegration.107 An exit strategy developed by
specialised probation officers with approved mentors from external organisations was the
recommendation made by David Anderson QC.108 We return to this subject below.

TPIM breaches

Mohammed Ahmed Mohamed

108.	On 1 November 2013, Mohammed Ahmed Mohamed absconded from his TPIM by
entering a mosque, removing his electronic tag and leaving dressed in a burkha. In the
statutory review of his TPIM in 2012, the High Court found that Mr Mohamed was closely
linked to a UK-based terrorist network with links to Al Qaida and Al-Shabaab. He had
travelled to Somalia where he received training in 2008 from experienced Al-Shabaab
operatives, after which he went on to fight for them on the front line in Somalia. He helped
others to travel from the UK to Somalia for similar purposes and he facilitated the support
of the UK-based network for terrorism-related activity in Somalia. The network, which
included Ibrahim Magag and Jama Hersi, had access to money (which Mr Mohamed was
involved in procuring), false passports and documentation, as well as equipment, and was
involved in procuring funds for terrorism-related activity. Between 2008 and 2010, Mr
Mohamed was involved in procuring weapons and planning attacks in Somalia and
elsewhere, including a planned attack on the Juba Hotel in Mogadishu in August 2010.
Other attacks were planned against western interests in Somaliland.109 The Home Office
have provided us with a chronology of their involvement with Mr Mohamed (see Annex
A).

109.	The Metropolitan Police told us that they were satisfied with their response to the
absconsion and did not feel that it could have been improved upon.110 However David
Anderson QC has recommended that some form of locational restraints to be introduced
in to TPIMs in order to lessen the ability of subjects to abscond.111 It is deeply worrying
that anyone who is subject to a TPIM, or those who were subjects of control orders, can
abscond with relative ease. We recommend that a review of the types of measures
placed upon subjects needs to be conducted to ensure that enough is being done to
prevent absconsion. 106 107 108 109 110 111

106	Q423

107	CTE0027

108	TPIMs report 2012, p53

109	http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Admin/2012/2837.html

110	Q356

111	TPIMs Report 2012, p4

Counter-terrorism 43

110.	During our evidence session it emerged that Mr Mohammed had been arrested on
three occasions, for a total of 21 suspected breaches of the terms of his Control Order
(March 2011 to February 2012) or TPIM (since February 2012) . He was remanded in
custody after each of these arrests, but the Court subsequently ruled in each case that he
should be released on bail. The prosecution in relation to the third arrest (on suspicion of a
‘tag tamper’ on 16 May) was discontinued, but Mr Mohamed was still on bail when he
absconded. He is due to stand trial for these alleged breaches (which do not include the
absconsion) in the week beginning 28 April 2014. If he is not present, it is likely that the
trial will be postponed. Mr Mohammed has also brought an appeal against the original
decision of the High Court to uphold his TPIM and a separate civil claim against the
Government. These cases are currently active before the courts and we make no comment
on them, though the next steps are uncertain in Mr Mohammed’s continued absence.

Prosecution of TPIM breaches

111.	The Home Office have provided details of other cases where a TPIM has been
breached following their introduction in 2012.

•	One person pleaded guilty to three counts of breaching: broadcasting without
permission, attending a meeting or gathering without permission and entering an
internet cafe without permission. He was sentenced to nine months imprisonment on
21 June 2013. Charges in relation to a further three counts were allowed to lie on file
following his guilty plea.

•	One person was charged with five counts of entering an excluded area without
permission. The CPS discontinued the prosecution because, in their view, there was no
realistic prospect of a conviction.

•	In three cases (of which Mr Mohamed was one) charges relating to tampering with the
electronic monitoring tag were discontinued after the CPS concluded that challenges to
the reliability of the forensic evidence meant that, in their view, there was no realistic
prospect of a conviction.

•	One person was found not guilty in relation to two counts of breaching—failure to
report to the police station and failure to report to the monitoring company as
required.

•	One person is currently remanded in custody awaiting trial, having been charged with
one count of breaching—having an unauthorised meeting.

112.	David Anderson QC suggested that one of the difficulties with prosecuting breaches
of TPIMs was that juries often considered the breach to be a ‘trivial’ matter and were
therefore reluctant to convict. In his report on TPIMs, he gave this example:

Another subject (CF) was charged in June 2012 with entering the Olympic
Park, an excluded area, without permission. The CPS decided not to pursue
the prosecution in September 2012.

44 Counter-terrorism

[...]

The alleged breach consisted of CF sitting on an over-ground train as it
crossed the Olympic Park, on his way to visit his solicitor in Stratford. After
receipt of evidence to the effect that the subject had been advised to take that
route by a junior employee of the solicitor’s firm, charges were dropped -
presumably on the basis that if the case had been left to them, the jury would
inevitably have found there to be a reasonable excuse.112

The Government’s position on decisions to prosecute for breach of TPIMs is that

The police investigate all potential breaches and consult with the CPS
regarding the viability of prosecution in each case. Where there is sufficient
admissible evidence and it is deemed to be in the public interest, a
prosecution for breach of the measures in a TPIM notice will usually be taken
forward.113

However, information provided by the Home Office shows that at the time of writing there
have been three trials for breach of a TPIM, one guilty plea and two forthcoming trials (one
of which is that of Mohammed Ahmed Mohamed). Not one of the three trials for a breach
of a TPIM has been won by the CPS. In two trials the defendants have been found not
guilty and in the third, the CPS discontinued the prosecution due to a lack of realistic
prospect of conviction. So far there have been no jury convictions of breaches of TPIMs
or Control Orders and the CPS needs to bear this in mind when bringing prosecutions.
We recommend that the Government and Crown Prosecution Service produce specific
guidance on investigating and prosecuting breaches. The continued failure to secure a
conviction undermines the system of TPIMs.

The prosecution of 'tag tampering'

113.	In regards to the ‘tag tamper’ case, Mr Mohamed’s solicitors—who represent two-
thirds of those subject to TPIMs—have written to us to highlight the deficiencies which
they believe to exist with the tags. They note that all of their TPIMs clients have been
accused of tampering with their tags and that this is an accusation which “all have
strenuously denied from the outset in police interviews and in subsequent correspondence
from their lawyers to the CPS.”114 They further note that another TPIM subject who was
represented by a different firm of solicitors had been subject to the same allegation of
tampering with their tag resulting in a tag-tamper alert for which the CPS maintains that
there is “no innocent explanation”. In evidence to us, G4S told us that

112	TPIMs report 2012, p83

113	https://www.aov.uk/aovernment/uploads/svstem/uploads/attachment data/file/199897/response-tpim-2012.pdf

114	CTF0018

Counter-terrorism 45

In terms of tamper detection systems and capabilities, this uses proven
technology which we have had in place in our equipment for many years now
and which has proved to be extremely reliable and robust.115

114.	Mr Mohamed’s solicitors have consulted experts who believe that the tamper alerts
are a result of the attachment of the larger GPS tag which are more likely to be “snagged,
twisted or rotated away from the leg”, using the same strap as used on the smaller, more
widely used tags. It has been noted that the tags have not been subjected to tests to establish
the effect of praying five times a day (which can involve repeated flexion and rotation of
the ankle) can have on the tag and strap, and that, due to the size of the tag, it can be
subject to greater wear and tear. Mr Mohamed’s solicitors note that “more than one wearer
of the new tag has reported tripping/falling down stairs, and knocking, for instance on a
bicycle.” Ross Anderson, Professor of Security Engineering at the University of Cambridge,
was consulted on tampering prosecutions and concluded that

The quality of evidence is poor, and in at least five cases now, when defence
experts have asked to examine the tags a defendant was supposed to have
tampered with, or the systems, or even samples of straps and clips, the
prosecution has been withdrawn or collapsed.116

115.	Many breaches of a TPIM order are minor infringements which might plausibly
have happened inadvertently. It is therefore right that the CPS does not prosecute every
single breach, considering the cost to the public purse and the difficulty of convincing a
jury of the materiality of the alleged breach without being able to explain the basis on
which the relevant restriction was included in the order. It is worth noting that no
prosecution has been successful following a not-guilty plea and in only one case has the
accused pleaded guilty. In the case of the tag tampering trial, it is of serious concern
that the prosecution was discontinued. Deliberately tampering with a tag must be
viewed as an attempt to abscond and we recommend that the Home Office request
independent testing of the tags provided by G4S to definitively prove, as they claim, a
tag-tamper alert can only be caused through deliberate actions. This will enable the
Home Office to present reliable evidence to the court that such an alert cannot be
caused inadvertently. Given that five prosecutions for tag tampering have been
withdrawn or collapsed it is vital that both the public and TPIM subjects understand
the extent to which it might or might not be possible for a tag-tamper alert to be
innocently caused.

De-radicalisation of those subject to TPIMs

116.	In his report examining the operation of TPIMs in 2012, the Independent Reviewer
emphasised that the imminent two-year limit would “focus energies on finding an exit
strategy”, but suggested that more needed to be done in this area. He recommended that
exit strategies should in future include the integration of any related Prevent activity into

115	Q53

116	CTF0018

46 Counter-terrorism

the management of the TPIM,117 as well as giving consideration to some form of dialogue
with subjects similar to that employed in criminal cases, where the probation service
proposes how an individual might best be rehabilitated.118 In his 2013 report on TPIMs,
David Anderson noted that his central recommendation—that a power to require
attendance at meetings with specified persons for the purposes of de-radicalisation and re-
integration—was not accepted by the Government despite the fact that it was supported by
the Joint Committee on Human Rights, the police, the security service and the National
Probation Service.119

117.	When he appeared before us, Mr Anderson again highlighted the importance of an
exit strategy. He allowed that it would not de-radicalise all of those subject to TPIMs, but
argued that it might have an impact on some.120 Assistant Commissioner Cressida Dick
also highlighted the need for a processes for managing the risk associated with the lifting of
TPIM restrictions:

We will need to manage any lingering risk that there may be around [former

TPIM subjects] and also in this phase work as well as we can with them to try

to ensure that they don’t pose any further risk.121

We examined de-radicalisation during our inquiry into The Roots of Violent Radicalisation
in 2012, where we noted the importance of family and community support in the counter-
radicalisation process.122 The anonymity order which is traditionally granted to those on
TPIMs makes this difficult. However the Home Secretary has told us that Prevent
interventions play a part in operational planning to manage the risk from TPIM subjects
after the expiry of TPIM measures. In his 2013 report, David Anderson QC also
emphasised the importance of devising a TPIMs exit strategy as soon as the TPIM is
imposed in order to allow time for trust to be built between the TPIM subject and the
probation officer.123

118.	In evidence, Cerie Bullivant told us that no attempt had been made to de-radicalise
him either when his control order was in force or after it had been quashed, despite the
Home Office continuing to assert that he was dangerous.124 We note that in their recent
Post Legislative Scrutiny report which examined TPIMs legislation, the Joint Committee
on Human Rights also questioned the Government’s de-radicalisation work with those
subject to TPIMs. The report highlighted that

117	Prevent is one of the four elements of CONTEST, the government's counter-terrorism strategy. It aims to stop people

becoming terrorists or supporting terrorism. See Nineteenth Report from the Home Affairs Committee of Session
2010-12, Roots of violent radicalisation (HC 1446)

118	TPIMs report 2012, p95

119	TPIMs report 2012, p53-54

120	Q109

121	Q357

122	Home Affairs Committee, Session 2010-12, Roots of violent radicalisation (HC 1446), para 64

123	TPIMs report 2012, p54

124 Q432

Counter-terrorism 47

We sought to find out more about the work being done with the individuals
concerned, such as how it relates to the Government’s wider -de-
radicalisation work; what sorts of agencies or other organisations the
Government has sought to involve in this work; whether any work has been
done with the families of TPIMs subjects, given the significant impact of
TPIMs on them and the risk of creating a new generation subject to the
influence of extremist narratives; and whether any TPIMs subjects are being
actively helped into work or study to assist with their reintegration when
their TPIM expires. On all of these questions, we found the Government to
be unforthcoming.125

119.	The Home Secretary told us that TPIMs is one of the tools the Home Office uses for
monitoring the activities of foreign fighters on their return from places like Somalia and
Syria126 although no TPIMs have yet been imposed on those who taken part in the Syrian
conflict. Shiraz Maher, Senior Fellow at the International Centre for the Study of
Radicalisation noted that there had been variable success with de-radicalisation strategies
within the UK but warned that any strategy to de-radicalise those who had fought in the
Syrian conflict would need to deal with the intra-Muslim conflict rather than the
traditional ‘West versus Islam’ narrative on which the PREVENT strategy currently
focuses.

120.	It is essential that the Government engages with those placed on a TPIM whilst
they are subject to the control and not only afterwards. It is a missed opportunity not to
implement a de-radicalisation programme until the subjects are free of the measures.
We recommend that all TPIM subjects are placed on a graduated scheme, which
commences concurrently with the measures, with the sole purpose of engagement and
de-radicalisation. We accept that the anonymity order may cause difficulties in terms of
liaising with the local community when seeking support for that process. However, we
believe that the Government should engage with community leaders who are working
with prisoners and ex-prisoners who have been radicalised in order to design a
programme which would be suitable for TPIM subjects. Such a programme should take
account of the different narratives of radicalisation. Due to the constraints placed on a
subject it is unlikely that they will be eager to engage with the state or official parts of
society. It is disastrous, therefore, for a subject to left without a constructive path
towards reintegration following the end of the measures. The Government must ensure
that an exit strategy is started as soon as the TPIM is imposed upon a subject. We
recommend a continuation of the de-radicalisation engagement programme which
they would have started under the TPIM which evolves into a more practical scheme
enabling the former subject to reconnect with society through work or education.

125	Joint Committee on Human Rights, Tenth Report of Session 2013-14, Post-legislative Scrutiny: Terrorism Prevention
and Investigation Measures Act 2011, HC 1014, para 78

126	Home Affairs Committee, The work of the Home Secretary, HSF0002

48 Counter-terrorism

Countering extremist narratives

121.	In our previous report on counter-terrorism, we noted that the internet could play a
role in the radicalisation of vulnerable individuals.127 The inducement to travel to Syria to
fight in the civil war seems to have taken place largely over social media.128 Dr
Hegghammer told us

Syria is the most socially mediated conflict in history and there is an
enormous amount of audio-visual documentation produced by rebels
themselves, documenting the things they do ... social media affects
recruitment simply by linking people up—Facebook, for example. When
someone travels to Syria and posts pictures from there and his friends see
those pictures, those friends are more likely to be inspired to go. That is not
really propaganda; that is just regular information conveyed through online
social media that then facilitates recruitment.129

122.	Countering the extremist narrative is something that must be supported both within
the community and by public authorities. The Metropolitan Police highlighted the
importance of parents and mosque leaders as well as visits to schools by police officers.130
The role of Governments in countering extremist narratives is thought to be most effective
when they act as a facilitator for other groups rather than delivering their own alternative
narrative. The Institute for Strategic Dialogue suggest that

One of the most important roles for government is in building capacity
among those best suited to act as counter-narrative messengers and
campaigners, who often lack the basic skills and competencies to do this
work effectively and at scale. This would focus on technical, communications
and strategic knowhow to ensure they understand how to construct their
messages, can develop the kinds of products and vehicles that will be well
received by an increasingly digitally-savvy generation used to high
production values, apply smart marketing strategies and have the right
networks to generate communication economies of scale.131

The EU Counter-Terrorism Coordinator supported this view noting that Governments
themselves are seen as biased making the priority creating an environment which is
conducive to counter-narrative.132 Both the EU Counter Terrorism Coordinator and
Richard Barrett suggested using the experiences of those who had returned from Syria as a
method of counter-narrative.133

127	Home Affairs Committee, Session 2010-12, Roots of violent radicalisation. HC 1446, para 33

128	Q487; 517

129	Q576-5

130	Q368-9

131	Institute of Strategic Dialogue, Review of programs to counter narratives of violent extremism, 2013, p26

132	Q517

133	Q518; 692

Counter-terrorism 49

123.	There are a number of civil society groups which work to produce a counter-narrative.
There are also examples of private sector involvement in assisting the development of
counter-narrative. The Against Violent Extremism network which is made up of a number
of former extremists and survivors of terrorism who engage with individuals and
organisations that are developing counter-extremist messages. The AVE network receives
funding from private sector—the Gen Next Foundations and Google Ideas.134

124.	Google also facilitates the development of counter-narratives through a project run by
YouTube, which we visited during our inquiry. YouTube run workshops through which it
provides a variety of free, in-kind support and services to civil society organisations. This
includes offering advice from creators with high audience numbers, support through
training on and access to production equipment including time in certain YouTube
studios. This project was highlighted by the Immigration and Security Minister as the sort
of initiative that the Government was keen to encourage.135

125.	One example of the projects which has been assisted by private sector funding is that
of Abdullah-X, a short animated mini counter-narrative graphic novel which describes a
fictional character’s journey and adventures based on countering extremism and hate. This
has involved advice on the design of the content and in-kind support to tailor the cartoon’s
delivery.136 Abdullah-X was created by a former extremist and the most recent Abdullah-X
video discusses the desire to travel to fight in Syria and alternative methods of helping the
Syrian people. Such work is an excellent example of work by those within the Muslim
community to counter the extremist narrative.

126.	We welcome the progress made by internet companies such as Google (who own
YouTube) in the work they are doing to promote counter narratives. We commend the
work by the creators of Abdullah-X and note the importance of peer-led education.
Given the role that social media is playing in the dissemination of extremist messages
we hope that other large multi-national social media companies will follow suit. We
note the significance of the independence of funding for these types of project but
recognise the desperate need for more resources to be made available. We, therefore,
recommend that the Government asks the European Union and other independent
funders to prioritise resources for community projects such as Abdullah-X.

Countering terrorist financing

127.	There has been an increase in activity to counter the financing of terrorist activity
since the events of 9/11. Despite a host of regulations having been introduced, identifying
terrorist financing is still an area of limited success. Written evidence submitted to us
suggested that this was the fault of government departments who were drawing up
requirements without issuing guidance on they ought to be implemented, stating

134	Institute of Strategic Dialogue, Review of programs to counter narratives of violent extremism, 2013, p20

135	Q890

136	Institute of Strategic Dialogue, Review of programs to counter narratives of violent extremism, 2013, p20

50 Counter-terrorism

banks and other financial service providers are effectively expected to play a
counter-terrorist role with almost no meaningful assistance from the
authorities.137

This is fUrther compounded by the fact that in the UK, the responsibility for countering
terrorism finance is spread across a number of departmental departments and agencies
with no department in charge of overseeing the policy.

128.	David Anderson’s report on terrorist asset freezing in 2013 found that only one
person (a Syrian national) had been designated in the period up to September 2013. He
noted that designation was not being considered in all the cases in which it could be of
value and that none of the 24 terrorists who had been convicted in early 2013 have been
designated. He suggests that

The fact that asset-freezing is administered by a different department from
other counter-terrorism powers means however that extra effort may be
required if asset-freezing is always to be considered as an alternative to or in
conjunction with other possible disposals for those believed to be engaged in
terrorism.138

The EU’s Counter-Terrorism coordinator told us that no bank accounts had been frozen in
relation to EU nationals travelling to fight in the Syria conflict.139 We have also heard
suggestions that the financial information of individuals could be used to identify foreign
fighters, either on a standalone basis or in conjunction with data from social media.140

129.	We recommend that the responsibility for countering terrorist financing be given
to the Office for Security and Counter-Terrorism where it will be considered a higher
priority. Although it is not an area where success comes easily, cutting off the flow of
money to terrorist organisations and the identification of foreign fighters are vital to
the UK’s response to the terrorist threat.

Charities

130.	There are over 350,000 charities in England and Wales of which over 163,000 are
registered with the Charities Commission. Although the total annual income of the

163,000	registered charities is £60 billion, just under half will have an annual income which
has less than £10,000. The Charity Commission told us that the vast majority of charities
are not at risk of terrorist abuse but that a small minority might be at risk from their
funding being diverted for terrorist purposes or for charity personnel using the charity as a
cover for travelling overseas or raising funds.141

137 CTF0014

138httPs://www.aov.uk/aovernment/uploads/svstem/uploads/attachment data/file/266421/third report on operation of tafa2010
171213.pdf

139	CTE0034

140	CTE0040

141 CTF0022

Counter-terrorism 51

131.	Following the death of the first British suicide bomber in Syria, concerns were raised
on the basis that he had joined a humanitarian convoy organised by a charity in order to
travel out to Syria. On 24 February 2014 the Charities Commission launched a regulatory
alert for charities sending humanitarian convoys to Syria, warning them that Foreign
Fighters may well be joining convoys in order to travel to Syria to fight the Assad regime.142
In a press interview, the Charity Commission’s head of investigations and enforcement
said more than a fifth of its 48 current terror investigations now relate to Syria.143 However,
in the Commission’s written evidence, it is highlighted that

The Commission is not a prosecuting authority and does not conduct
criminal investigations. Where there are concerns about suspected terrorist
abuse connected to a charity, the Commission will always liaise with and
work closely with the police and the Security Service as terrorist activity is a
criminal offence.144

132.	The Henry Jackson Society criticised the Charity Commission for its lack of
effectiveness in countering terrorist abuse of charities.

The Charity Commission has demonstrated limited abilities to tackle
fundraising by U.K.-based charities for terrorist purposes, and, more broadly,
to vet or disqualify unsuitable charitable trustees by virtue of their association
with terrorism.145

The Society suggested that lack of resources was a significant issue for the commission.
Professor Clive Walker suggested that the system could be improved by instituting a
financial investigation approach which

should primarily be conducted by a formal police body. The roles left for the
Charity Commission would be as standard-setter, as standard-monitor (with
early alerts back to the police financial investigators), and as standard-applier
(with police advice).146

Professor Walker suggests that had such an investigatory system existed in the past then it
could have improved provision of information about terrorist networks and reduced the
facilitation of militancy without diverting money from worthy causes. We note that our
sister committee, the Public Accounts Committee made a recommendation earlier this
year needed to respond more quickly in relations to concerns around individual
charities.147 In its formal response the Charity Commission emphasised that it needed both

142	https://www.charitvcommission.aov.uk/news/svria-and-aid-convovs/

143	http://www.thesundavtimes.co.uk/sto/news/uk news/National/article1379084.ece

144	CTE0022

145	CTE001 5

146	INQ0011

147 Public Accounts Committee, Forty-second Report of Session 2013-14, The Charity Commission. HC 792, p5

52 Counter-terrorism

more resources and stronger legal powers in order to prevent and tackle abuse and
mismanagement.148

133.	There have also been concerns raised around the impact that regulations aimed at
countering terrorist financing have on charities trying to move funds in to areas of conflict.
The Charity Finance Group told us that a number of international charities are finding it
increasingly challenging as banks become overly risk-averse. The examples given were the
withdrawal of banking facilities from money service businesses in Somalia and the inability
to transfer funds in to Syria. It emphasised the role that charities play in countering
terrorism.

Many international charities have operations that provide humanitarian
assistance, healthcare, outreach and infrastructure building - all of these
activities support and the stabilising and development of regions, which in
turn contributes to restricting the growth of terrorist activity abroad. Civil
society plays a key - albeit secondary - role in supporting counter-terrorism
efforts and this consideration should be the starting point when developing
policy to prevent the abuse of charities by terrorist organisations.149

The Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation has announced that he is intending to
examine this subject over the next year following UN recommendation that more work
needed to be done to reconcile counter-terrorism measures and humanitarian effort.150

134.	We are deeply concerned with the potential for ‘bogus’ charities to dupe members
of the public into raising funds which are eventually used to support terrorist activity.
We recommend that the Charity Commission be granted extra resources and stronger
legal powers to counter the abuse of charities by terrorists. We also recommend that the
Charity Commission be able to undertake unannounced inspections in order to audit
their accounts.

135.	We welcome the Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation’s inquiry in to the
impact of counter-terrorism legislation on charities and recommend that it be
expanded to look at the scale of abuse of charitable status to support terrorist actions.
We recommend that he assess the response to such abuse and suggest changes which
will improve the ability of the authorities to tackle terrorist financing whilst ensuring
that law-abiding charities can continue their vital work.

The proposal to move counter terrorism to the National Crime
Agency

136.	The national Police CT Network comprises of

• the Counter-Terrorism Command (SO15) within the Metropolitan Police;

148	http://www.charrtvcommission.aov.uk/news/commission-chairman-calls-for-adequate-fundina-and-stronaer-powers/

149	CTE0019

150 Terrorist Asset-Freezing etc. Act 2010. Independent Reviewer's Annual Report, December 2013, p25

Counter-terrorism 53

•	four Counter-Terrorism Units (CTUs) in the West Midlands, West Yorkshire, Greater
Manchester and Thames Valley; and

•	Counter-Terrorism Intelligence Units (CTIUs) in the East Midlands, South West and
Eastern regions, and Wales and Scotland.

137.	The Metropolitan Police’s SO15 Counter Terrorism Command was created in 2006,
taking over the roles and responsibilities of the Anti-Terrorist Branch and Special Branch.
It is designated to protect London and the UK from the threat of terrorism. Counter
Terrorism Command is responsible for:

•	bringing to justice those engaged in terrorist, domestic extremist and related offences;

•	providing a proactive and reactive response to terrorist, domestic extremist and related
offences, including the prevention and disruption of terrorist activity;

•	supporting the National Co-ordinator of Terrorist Investigations outside London;

•	gathering and exploiting intelligence on terrorism and extremism in London;

•	assessing, analysing and developing intelligence to drive operational activity;

•	engage in partnerships with London's communities in order to understand their
concerns and to provide reassurance and support where needed;

•	providing an explosive ordnance disposal and chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear capability in London

•	assist the British Security Service and Secret Intelligence Service in fulfilling their
statutory roles;

•	to be the police single point of contact for international partners in counter-terrorism
matters;

•	assisting in the protection of British interests overseas and the investigation of attacks
against those interests.151

The regional Counter-Terrorism Units have been set up in the past few years and are
resourced by 'lead' police forces. Their role includes the gathering of intelligence and
evidence to help prevent, disrupt and prosecute terrorist activities.152

138.	Following the proposed creation of the National Crime Agency, there were
suggestions that the counter-terrorism policing could move from the Metropolitan Police
in to the NCA. On 8 June 2011, the Government published The National Crime Agency: A
plan for the creation of a national crime-fighting capability, which expanded on the

151	http://www.met.police.uk/so/counter terrorism.htm

152	http://www.acpo.police.uk/ACPOBusinessAreas/TerrorismandAlliedMatters.aspx

54 Counter-terrorism

information about the National Crime Agency included in Policing in the 21st Century. The
plan stated that there would be four distinct commands within the National Crime Agency:

•	Organised Crime

•	Border Policing

•	Economic Crime

•	Child Exploitation and Online Protection Centre.

The plan did not rule out the possibility that counter-terrorism could be one of the
National Crime Agency’s responsibilities at some point in the future:

Counter-terrorism policing already has effective national structures. The
Government is considering how to ensure these strengths are maintained
and enhanced alongside the rest of its new approach to fighting crime.
However, no wholesale review of the current counter-terrorism policing
structures will be undertaken until after the 2012 London Olympic and
Paralympic Games and the establishment of the NCA.153

In their written evidence to this inquiry, the Home Office did not elaborate further upon
their intentions.

The NCA will lead work on serious, organised and complex crime, including
cyber crime and border security. Once the agency is up and running the
Government will consider what - if any - role, it should play in respect of CT.
Until then, the NCA will work with the Police CT Network on issues of
common interest.

139.	We note that the Metropolitan Police believe that in order to maintain the link
between neighbourhood policing and counter-terrorism policing, the police counter-
terrorism network should not be moved to the NCA. Their written evidence to this inquiry
emphasised the prevention and detection work carried out by front line policing where the
neighbourhood officer’s role is the ability to build relationships, confidence and trust. It is
hoped that such a relationship will encourage greater public vigilance, responsiveness and
passing of intelligence. It is also noted that front line policing that will be the first to
respond to a terrorist attack where they will act to preserve life, safety and evidence. It is
that response which sets the tone for the investigation and wider community confidence.154
In this opinion, they are supported by David Anderson QC who told the Committee that

We have a system that, although not ideal, does at least work pretty well and
it has one priceless benefit that one does not see to the same extent in a lot of
other countries, which is a pretty good operational relationship between
police and intelligence. At the other end you have another benefit. You saw,
for example, the investigation of the murder of Mohammed Saleem in

153 Ibid.

154 INQ0003

Counter-terrorism 55

Birmingham earlier this year. That was a terrorism investigation but what
you saw there was specialist terrorist police working very well with local
police. By the end it was a question of knocking on doors and say, “Have you
seen this man?” Again, the fact that the unit was embedded in the local
community and was part of a local force, I think, had some usefulness.155

140.	Both Charles Farr156 and Professor Sir David Omand highlighted the effectiveness of
the relationship between the police, the security and intelligence agencies and the Crown
Prosecution Service. However Professor Sir David Omand also noted that

the present arrangements involving the Security Service and the Met and the
other police services in England and Wales and Scotland are not the only
possible ones, nor necessarily the most economical. But they have evolved
under fire and I would be very cautious about seeking to replace them with a
theoretical structure that might look tidier on paper, such as giving the lead
to the NCA, until we have seen both a significant diminution in the threat
and an NCA that has established itself firmly as being on the top of its game
in relation to serious organised criminality.157

141.	The National Crime Agency was established as a national mechanism as part of the
changing landscape of policing. Like all new organisations, it is still seeking to establish
a strong identity and its own remit. For instance, we remain concerned that the NCA
does not have full operational capacity in Northern Ireland. The Metropolitan Police
have a wide remit which has many complexities and the current difficulties faced by the
organisation lead us to believe that the responsibility for counter-terrorism ought to be
moved to the NCA in order to allow the Met to focus on the basics of policing London.
The work to transfer the command ought to begin immediately with a view to a full
transfer of responsibility for counter-terrorism operations taking place, for example
within five years after the NCA became operational, in 2018. When this takes place, it
should finally complete the jigsaw of the new landscape of policing.

Partnership in the fight against terrorism

142.	Although the counter-terrorism command and the security service are pivotal in the
fight against terrorism, others also play a role. In 2012, a traffic police officer impounded a
car which didn’t have insurance which led to a discovery of weapons. The weapons (and a
homemade bomb) were to have been used against supporters of the EDL at a rally in
Dewsbury. In 2007, a plot to blow up the Tiger Tiger nightclub in London was discovered
when Ambulance staff reported a suspicious vehicle to Police. The vehicle was discovered
to contain a bomb which was defused.

143.	During the visit to Kenya undertaken as part of this inquiry, we visited the site of the
Westgate shopping centre where terrorists killed scores of people. The devastation caused

155	Q124

156	Q232

157	INQ0012

56 Counter-terrorism

by the acts of terrorism that day highlight the need for vigilance on the part of the public
and private enterprise. Terrorists can strike anywhere and previous terrorist plots in the
UK have focused on shopping centres (including planned attacks on Bluewater and the
Trafford Centre). The National Counter Terrorism Security Office has produced Counter
Terrorism Protective Security Advice for Shopping Centres.158 However, as the British
Council of Shopping Centres notes

Security of shopping centres is not just about conducting risk assessments
and installing the latest equipment. The way in which operators are trained,
their use of equipment and the general environment in which this equipment
is used, will all have a significant impact on the overall performance of the
security system.159

Following the Westgate attack, the British Council of Shopping Centres issued up to date
guidance on firearms attacks in shopping centres, noting the importance of developing and
testing a Response Plan.160

144.	Both members of the public and those in private enterprises have to ensure that
vigilance is constant, this is especially important in areas where crowds of people
congregate. Those in charge of areas visited by high numbers of people (such as
shopping centres) must ensure that they have adequate security, surveillance and
response plans. Ensuring public safety cannot be the sole purview of the counter-
terrorism command and the security service, it is a responsibility in which all UK
citizens and companies take a share. We note that the British Council of Shopping
Centres have updated their guidance following the Westgate attack. We recommend
that all police forces ensure that local shopping centres have received this guidance and
put in place and test a Response Plan.

158	http://nactso-dev.co.uk/svstem/cms/files/120/files/oriainal/Shoppina Centres 2011 .pdf

159	http://www.bcsc.ora.uk/media/downloads/2012 HumanFactors.pdf

160	http://www.bcsc.ora.uk/publication.asp7pub id=487

Counter-terrorism 57

6	Oversight of the security and
intelligence agencies

145.	The oversight of the security and intelligence agencies has long been a matter of
concern for this Committee. In reports in 1992 and again in 1997161 we have recommended
that the security service (which is nominally under the purview of the Home Secretary
although its head reports directly to the Prime Minister) ought to be subject to scrutiny
from the Home Affairs Committee. We have consistently been denied the opportunity to
take evidence from senior officials who work in the national security structure and we are
highly unimpressed that we had to summon the independent Intelligence Services
Commissioner in order to take evidence from him. For information we have attached an
analysis on the UK and US systems of oversight of the security and intelligence agencies
which examines the plaudits and criticisms of each system (found at Annex B). We believe
that the current oversight is not fit for purpose for several reasons which we set out below.

Parliamentary oversight

146.	The UK’s intelligence and security agencies were not recognised in statute until 1989
(MI5) and 1994 (MI6 and GCHQ) when a ruling from the European Court of Human
Rights required them to be to be placed on a statutory footing. The Intelligence and
Security Committee was set up by act, the Intelligence Services Act 1994 (and later
amended by the Justice and Security Act 2013), which means that it is a statutory body,
rather than a Select Committee appointed by the House.

147.	The Intelligence and Security Committee was set up as a Committee of nine
parliamentarians appointed by the Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the
Opposition. The Chairman of the Committee was also appointed in the same manner. The
Committee were then required to produce an annual report to the Prime Minister who, in
consultation with the Intelligence and Security Committee, would then redact any
information considered to be harmful to national security before presenting the report to
Parliament at a time of his or her choosing.162

148.	The statute concerning the Intelligence and Security Committee was then amended by
the Justice and Security Act 2013 which made the following changes:

•	The relevant House of Parliament now appoints their own of the 9 members of the
Committee (although only on the basis of nominations by the Prime Minister in
consultation with the Leader of the Opposition)

•	The Chair of the Committee is now chosen by the membership of the Committee

161	Home Affairs Committee, First Report of Session 1992-93, Accountability of the Security Service, HC 265; Home Affairs

Committee, Third Report of Session 1998-99, Accountability of the Security Service, HC 291

162	http://www.leqislation.qov.uk/ukpqa/1994/13/section/10

58 Counter-terrorism

•	It broadened the remit of the ISC to allow it to examine operational matters under
certain circumstances

•	It required the Committee to report to Parliament although the Prime Minister is still,
in consultation with the Intelligence and Security Committee, able to redact the
report163

•	It no longer allows the head of the security and intelligence agencies to refuse to
provide information to the Intelligence and Security Committee (although the relevant
Secretary of State can still refuse to allow the Intelligence and Security Committee
access to any information he or she decides that such information is ‘sensitive’, should
not be disclosed ‘in the interests of national security’ or it is ‘information of such a
nature that, if the Secretary of State were requested to produce it before a Departmental
Select Committee of the House of Commons, the Secretary of State would consider (on
grounds which were not limited to national security) it proper not to do so.’)

•	Witnesses to the Committee are given the benefit of their evidence to the ISC being
barred from use in any criminal, civil or disciplinary proceedings (unless the evidence
was given in bad faith)164

149.	In the time of its existence, the Intelligence and Security Committee has been subject
to criticism in regards to a number of their inquiries. The Intelligence and Security
Committee’s report on the intelligence and assessments around Iraqi Weapons of Mass
Destruction led to significant criticism of the Committee. The Hutton report published
many of the documents which the Intelligence and Security Committee had examined but
decided not to publish and the Butler report highlighted information about MI6
withdrawing intelligence which the Intelligence and Security Committee had failed to
examine in their report.165 Furthermore, it later emerged that the Committee had not been
provided with all the relevant JIC assessments by the Government despite assurances to the
contrary. The Intelligence and Security Committee later concluded that this had been a
mistake rather than a deliberate attempt to mislead the Committee but still expressing
considerable concern that such a mistake could take place. One academic described this as
a “masterful understatement” given the nature of the inquiry.166 On two occasions the
Committee has been required to return to issues that were subject to earlier inquiries. The
first occasion was the 7/7 bombings. It emerged that despite the Committee’s earlier
reassurance that that the security service had not sought to investigate two of the bombers
when they had appeared on the periphery of another investigation, MI5 had had them

163	ht.t.p://www.leaislat.ion.aov.uk/ukpaa/?013/18/part/1/crossheadina/oversiaht.-bv-t.he-int.elliaence-and-securit.v-

committee-of-parliament/enacted

164	http://www.leaislation.aov.Uk/ukpaa/2013/18/schedule/1/enacted

165	The UK's Intelligence and Security Committee, Ian Leigh, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services, Born and

Capriana (eds), 2007, Pp 192-194. Also, "A Very British Institution": The Intelligence and Security Committee and
Intelligence Accountability in the United Kingdom, Mark Phythian, The Oxford Handbook of National Security
Intelligence, Loch K. Johnson (eds), 2012, p707

166	The UK's Intelligence and Security Committee, Ian Leigh, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services, Born and

Capriana (eds), 2007, , P193

Counter-terrorism 59

under surveillance for more than a year. The second is that of rendition where the
Committee’s inquiry cleared the security service of collusion in torture only for a High
Court Judge to undermine this assertion in his judgement on the Binyam Mohamed case
which we refer to later in paragraph 34 of Annex B. Following the decision to conclude the
Gibson inquiry which was examining “whether Britain was implicated in the improper
treatment of detainees, held by other countries, that may have occurred in the aftermath of
9/11”167 the Intelligence and Security Committee have now been asked by the Government
to

inquire into the themes and issues that Sir Peter [Gibson] has raised, take
further evidence, and report to the Government and to Parliament on the
outcome of its inquiry.168

Professor Sir David Ormond admitted the information given to parliamentarians before
the vote on the second Iraq war was inaccurate.

Paul Flynn: You accepted the likely existence of weapons of mass destruction,
did you not?

Professor Sir David Omand: Yes.

Paul Flynn: And you were wrong.

Professor Sir David Omand: Yes. Well, we believe we were wrong.169

150.	Both the shadow Justice Minister and the Chairman of the APPG on Rendition have
questioned the ability of the Committee to do so.170 The Joint Committee on Human
Rights has criticised the Intelligence and Security Committee noting that

The missing element, which the ISC has failed to provide, is proper
ministerial accountability to Parliament for the activities of the Security
Services. In our view, this can be achieved without comprising individual
operations if the political will exists to provide more detailed information to
Parliament about the policy framework, expenditure and activities of the
relevant agencies. The current situation, in which Ministers refuse to answer
general questions about the Security Services, and the Director General of
MI5 will answer questions from the press but not from parliamentarians, is
simply unacceptable.171

We invited Sir Malcolm Rifkind, as Chair of the Intelligence and Security Committee to
give evidence to us on its work. He declined to do so.

167	HC Deb, 6 July 2010: Col. 176

168	HC Deb, 19 Dec 2013: Col. 915

169	Q592

170	HC Deb, 19 Dec 2013: Col. 917: 921

171	Joint Committee on Human Rights, Twenty-third Report of Session 2008-09, Allegations of UK Complicity in Torture

HC 230, para 65

60 Counter-terrorism

151.	We asked the Immigration and Security Minister why the relevant departmental select
committees were not able to scrutinise the work of the services, he told us that

I	believe that we have very robust system and one of the strongest systems in
the world to provide that level of oversight. I think the handling of sensitive
material is one that does need to be conducted with care, how we can ensure
that information that is secret remains secret and particularly how it could be
to our disadvantage if it came into the hands of those who have malign intent
against this country.172

152.	We undertook a comparison between the UK and US systems of oversight.

	Parliament	House	Senate
Number of members	9	21	15
Number of staff	8 and one part-time investigator.173	36174	45175
Membership appointed by	Parliament, following nomination by the Prime Minister who must consult with the Leader of the Opposition	Party leadership	Party leadership
Members vetted prior to appointment176	No	No (but all members of the House of Representatives are automatically given access to classified material upon their election)	No (but all members of the Senate are automatically given access to classified material upon their election)
Confirmation of appointment of key officials177	No	No	Yes
Access to classified material	Access can be refused by Secretary of State178	Total Access	Total Access
Can reveal classified material without permission from the executive	No	No	Yes, with the approval of the full Senate
Prior notification	No legal duty (although the ISC has informed agencies that it would expect to be 'properly and promptly informed' of their activities.179)	Yes (except in times of emergency when the agency can delay reporting for up to two days)	Yes (except in times of emergency when the agency can delay reporting for up to two days)

172	Q884

173	CTE0042. Letter from Sir Malcolm Rifkind MP. He notes that there are four full-time vacancies and three part-time

vacancies on the staff of the Committee.

174	http://www.leaistorm.com/office/House Permanent Select Committee on Intelliaence/1538/187.html

175	http://www.leaistorm.com/office/Senate Select Committee on Intelliaence/687/189.html

176	Parliamentary and External Oversight of Intelligence Services, Hans Born, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services,

Born and Caparini (eds), 2007, P174

177	Ibid., p183

178	Schedule 1, Part 4 (2) (b)

179	Parliamentary and External Oversight of Intelligence Services, Hans Born, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services,

Born and Caparini (eds), 2007, P185

Counter-terrorism 61

Produce annual reports on the work of the	Yes	Yes	Yes
Committee			

153.	In 2007, researchers wrote that robust accountability by a legislature relied on three
factors - authority, ability and attitude.180 There are two different approaches to legislative
oversight which are discussed in academic literature - the ‘police-patrol’ and the ‘fire-
alarm’ model. The police-patrol model is defined as the legislature examining a sample of
activities carried out by an executive agency, the idea being that it will detect any activity
which contravenes the legislature’s expectation of practices and that such surveillance will
discourage an agency form engaging in actions which would result in disapproval or action
on the part of the legislature. The fire-alarm model is a more reactive model whereby the
legislature will be alerted to activities which contravene the legislature’s (and the public’s)
expectations of practice by interest groups, the media or even their electorate.181

154.	Whilst the US and UK have similar ‘police-patrol’ bodies within their legislature, their
‘fire-alarm’ bodies differ. In US, responses to perceived failures within the intelligence
community have tended to be presidential or congressional commissions. In contrast, in
the UK, the response in recent times has been to set up an inquiry, usually led by a senior
judicial figure (which is therefore outside of the legislature). However these two approaches
appear to be converging - the UK’s Commission on Banking Standards was similar in its
nature to a Congressional Commission whereas the presidentially-ordered review into
intelligence and communications technologies could be seen as being similar to an
independent inquiry, such as the Butler Committee.

155.	It has been suggested that oversight committees in both the US and the UK were
aware of the programmes highlighted by Edward Snowden’s leaks to various media
outlets.182 Following those leaks there are a number of inquiries being held in various
legislatures on the issue of balancing privacy with security. In the US, the reaction of
Congressional Committees has been to hold inquiries with Judiciary Committees in both
the House and the Senate holding inquiries as well as the Intelligence Committees. It is
obvious that the latitude afforded to congressional committees to examine intelligence
matters by the executive is perhaps the key difference between the US system and the UK
system where the Government consistently refuses to allow committees other than the ISC
to ask questions on the work of the security and intelligence agencies. Given that a number
of important issues have been raised and debated as part of the work of the Judiciary
Committees, it is perhaps telling that the debate has been more charged in the US where
more representatives are able to scrutinise the work of such agencies.

180	Intelligence Services: Strengthening Democratic Accountability, Hans Born and Fairlie Jensen, Democratic Control of

Intelligence Services, Born and Caparini (eds), 2007, P266

181	Governing in the Absence of Angels: On the Practice of Intelligence Accountability in the United States, Loch K.

Johnson, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service Accountability. Born, Johnson, and Leigh
(eds), 2005, Pp59-60

182	http://www.iiss.org/en/politics%20and%20strategy/blogsections/2013-98d0/november-47b6/snowden-9dd1

62 Counter-terrorism

156.	A number of the witnesses to this inquiry took the opportunity to highlight the
improvements to the Intelligence and Security Committee which were contained within
the Justice and Security Act 2013. There were suggestions that the committee ought not to
be judged on its previous failures but rather time ought to be given to see how it worked
under the new regime. Other witnesses felt that there was still room for improvement.
These improvements include:

•	Election of the membership of the Committee by the House of Commons

•	The Chair of the Committee being a member of the Opposition and not a former
Minister with responsibility for any of the agencies

•	Ensuring that the Committee have access to relevant expertise (for instance in terms of
the technological aspect of the work carried out by the security and intelligence
agencies)

•	Allowing other parliamentary Committees to scrutinise the work of the security and
intelligence agencies.183

157.	We do not believe the current system of oversight is effective and we have concerns
that the weak nature of that system has an impact upon the credibility of the agencies
accountability, and to the credibility of Parliament itself. The scrutiny of the work of
the security and intelligence agencies should be not the exclusive preserve of the
Intelligence and Security Committee. Whilst we recognise the importance of limiting
the access to documents of a confidential nature, we believe that as the relevant
departmental select committee, we ought to be able to take oral evidence from the head
of the security service. Engagement with elected representatives is not, in itself, a
danger to national security and to continue to insist so is hyperbole. There are
questions about the accuracy of information provided to the House by the security and
intelligence agencies in the past, particularly in 2003. As future decisions on warfare
look likely to be determined by votes of the members of the House of Commons, there
is heightened importance in ensuring that the House is accurately informed in future.

158.	Furthermore we recommend that the Commons membership of the Intelligence
and Security Committee should be elected like other select committees and that the
Chair, who should always be a member of the Commons, ought to be subject to election
of the whole House, as is the case for Select Committees. We further recommend that
the Chair should always be a member of the largest opposition party.

Judicial and expert oversight

159.	We took evidence from two of the other three offices responsible for oversight—the
Commissioner for the Interception of Communications and the Commissioner for the
Intelligence Services. We did not take evidence from the Investigatory Powers Tribunal.
However, we wish to take this opportunity to note that in its latest annual report, the

183	Q329; 794

Counter-terrorism 63

Investigatory Powers Tribunal has failed to disclose how many cases were decided in
favour of the complainant. The 2010 (inaugural) annual report of the Investigatory Powers
Tribunal was a forty page document. The 2011 report was a three page statistical release.
The 2012 annual report was a two paragraph new story on its website.

160.	Nick Pickles told us that the Investigatory Powers Tribunal was a weak method of
oversight and that given the introduction of closed material proceedings following the
Justice and Security Act 2013, it was also unnecessary.184 The statistics which have been
produced by the Investigatory Powers Tribunal indicate that out of 1468 the Tribunal has
received it has decided in the favour of ten complainants. None of the ten successful
complaints were made against the security service. In an interview with BBC Radio 4 in
November 2013, Mr Justice Burton, President of the Investigatory Powers Tribunal
explained the process.

What we do when receive a complaint is that we make inquiries of the
respondent who are suspected or suggested to have taken part in this
complaint and we then obtain their answers and we can and do inspect the
files. There is nothing we cannot see.

When Mr Justice Burton was asked how he could be sure that everything was provided to
the Investigatory Powers Tribunal, he replied that it was never possible to be completely
sure but that the agencies were under a statutory duty to comply with the Tribunal.185

161.	The BBC Radio 4 interview with Mr Justice Burton was the first time a member of the
Tribunal had spoken to media since the Tribunal had been set up. When questioned as to
his motivation, Mr Justice Burton explained that he was

Very anxious that people should know about our tribunal and that we
shouldn’t be considered to be something hole-in-the-corner and hidden
away. ... It’s equally important to have the trust of the applicants. And of
course, particularly where it is not often that the applicants are successful we
do want to make it plain that we are very conscious of the tension of natural
justice and natural security and very anxious, so far as we can, to operate our
procedures fairly.186

162.	The Investigatory Powers Tribunal is the only body which can investigate
individual complaints against the security and intelligence agencies and actions taken
under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act. It ought to command public
confidence in its actions. For there to be public confidence there must first be public
understanding of the work of the Tribunal. We recommend that the if the Investigatory
Powers Tribunal are unwilling to voluntarily produce a detailed annual report on their
work, that legislation be amended so that they are required to do so. Such an annual
report should, at the very least contain the number of cases it has received and the

184	Q816

185	http://www.bbc.co.uk/proarammes/b03abs6n

186	http://www.bbc.co.uk/proarammes/b03abs6n

64 Counter-terrorism

outcome of cases determined in that year with comparable data for the previous four
years. We also recommend that the data be broken down to show which agency the
complaint was against.

163.	The information given to us by the Commissioners indicate that they examine a small
number of warrants under the current oversight system. The Intelligence Services
Commissioner told us that in 2012 he had examined 8.5% of warrants.187 The Interception
of Communications Commissioner told us that he had examined between 5% and 10% of
the applications. He was not able to be more specific as he did not know how many
applications there were.188 When we asked the Intelligence Services Commissioner what
percentage of consolidated guidance or disciplinary cases he examined, he was unable to
tell us. Despite agreeing to inform us in writing, he has subsequently refused to do so and
instead told us that he intends to ‘try’ and publish the figures in his annual report.189

164.	We also have concerns regarding the Intelligence Services Commissioner’s description
of his investigation in to the allegations that GCHQ had acted illegally. In giving evidence
to us, he told us that the extent of his investigation was a conversation with the second
head of GCHQ. When we asked him if he’d undertaken any further investigatory work to
satisfy himself that the agency had not been engaging in illegal practices, he replied that his
investigatory work had not gone beyond that discussion.190 For the purposes of clarity we
have reproduced the entire exchange below.

Q734 Chair: You went down to GCHQ.

Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Q735 Chair: You went to see who there?

Sir Mark Waller: I saw the second head of the agency, in fact.

Q736 Chair: How did you satisfy yourself? It seems, from your comment,

that what you did was you had a discussion with them, you heard what they

had to say and you have accepted what they had to say.

Sir Mark Waller: Certainly.

Chair: Is that it?

Sir Mark Waller: Certainly.

Chair: Just a discussion?

Sir Mark Waller: Certainly.

Chair: Nothing else?

187	CTE0037

188	Q653-5

189	CTE0037

190 Q735-6

Counter-terrorism 65

Sir Mark Waller: Certainly.

Q737 Chair: That is the way you were satisfied that there was no
circumventing on UK law. You went to see them. You sat round a table. You
had a discussion—

Sir Mark Waller: You have to remember that I had done a year and a half s
inspection. I have a very good idea as to what the ethos of this agency is.

Chair: Of course.

Because of our surprise that the Commissioner had been prepared to make a public
statement in support of the agency without first undertaking a thorough investigation we
later returned to the point of the fact that this was based on a single conversation. At no
point during either exchange did the Intelligence Services Commissioner clarify that his
statement was as a result of an investigation that went beyond the previously mentioned
discussion.191 Given that the questioning was very specific, we are unable to understand
why there should have been any confusion concerning the nature of the question.
However, in written evidence to us the Intelligence Services Commissioner later clarified
that

I	realise from the transcript that it appears I only saw the second in
command at GCHQ to make my assessment. In fact I met with a number of
senior officials who made themselves available to me including a GCHQ
lawyer. I was also able to question lain Lobban the head of GCHQ in order to
come to the conclusion in my 2012 Report.192

165.	In regards to the work of the two Commissioners, we have some sympathy with the
assertion made by the Rt Hon. David Davis MP when he told us that the Commissioners
are good people doing impossible jobs.193 However, we also note that both of the
Commissioner roles are part-time positions. The Interception of Communication
Commissioner has assured us that he has enough resources with his team of investigators
having been increased to nine last year.194 The Intelligence Services Commissioner only has
a personal assistant but he maintained that the strength of his role was that he alone was
responsible for overseeing the warrants.195 Both Commissioners felt that an Inspector-
General would be unsuitable to undertake the work that they currently carried out. The
Interception of Communications Commissioner thought that it would lead to a dilution of
personal responsibility and the Intelligence Services Commissioner believed that it would
create an “unnecessary bureaucracy.”196

191	Q743-4

192	CTE0037

193	Q827

194	Q649

195	Q724

196	Q677; 757

66 Counter-terrorism

166.	It is unacceptable that there is so much confusion around the work of the
Intelligence Services Commissioner and the Interception of Communications
Commissioner. We recommend that as a matter of urgency data is collected on how
many applications there were under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act and
how many people were subsequently subject to an application. Furthermore, the fact
that the Intelligence Services Commissioner cannot tell us what percentage of
consolidated guidance cases or disciplinary proceedings he has examined is concerning.

167.	We have serious doubts that either the Interception of Communications
Commissioner role or the Intelligence Services Commissioner role should be part-time.
We are also concerned that the extent of the Intelligence Services Commissioner’s staff
is one personal assistant. The fact that less than 10% of warrants which allow intrusion
in to the private lives of individuals are examined is concerning—we believe this figure
ought to be at least 50%, if not higher. We recommend that the Commissioners are
made full-time positions and that their resources are increased to allow them to
examine half of the requests for information.

168.	All parts of the oversight system need to do more to improve public confidence in
their work. We recommend that each of the Commissioners and the Investigatory
Powers Tribunal develop an outreach strategy which ought to be published as part of
their annual reports along with details of how they have tried to fulfil the objective of
improving knowledge of their work.

169.	Our decision to examine the oversight system following the theft of a number of
documents from the National Security Agency by Edward Snowden. The documents were
stolen in order to publicise mass surveillance programmes run by a number of national
intelligence agencies. The documents were sent to several journalists and subsequently
press reports detailing the programmes have been published in a number of countries.
There have been criticisms of the newspapers who have published details of the
programmes but Alan Rusbridger, Editor of The Guardian newspaper responded to those
criticisms by noting that

the alternative to having the newspapers—and you can criminalise
newspapers all you like and try to take them out of this—the next leak or the
next Edward Snowden or the next Chelsea Manning will not go to
newspapers. They will dump the stuff on the internet.197

One of the reasons that Edward Snowden has cited for releasing the documents is that he
believes that the oversight of security and intelligence agencies is not effective.198 It is
important to note that when we asked British civil servants—the National Security Adviser
and the head of MI5—to give evidence to us they refused. In contrast, Mr Rusbridger came
before us and provided open and transparent evidence.

197	Q309

198	http://www.europarl.europa.eu/document/act.ivit.ies/cont./?01403/?0140307ATT80674/?0140307ATT80674FN.pdf

Counter-terrorism 67

170.	The security and intelligence agencies are staffed by brave men and women who in
many cases risk their lives to protect this country. They deserve our gratitude and they
deserve to be honoured for their work. The best way to honour them is by ensuring that
there are no questions about their integrity and, in order to prove this, there must be
adequate scrutiny of their actions. The current system of oversight belongs to a pre-
internet age, a time when a person’s word was accepted without question. What is
needed is a scrutiny system for the 21st century, to ensure that sophisticated security
and intelligence agencies can get on with the job with the full confidence of the public.

Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000

171.	The Investigatory Powers Tribunal, The Intelligence Services Commissioner and the
Interception of Communications Commissioner were all created under the Regulation of
Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (RIPA). The Act provides the legislative framework for the
use of methods of surveillance and information-gathering used in efforts to prevent crime,
including terrorism. RIPA makes provision for:

•	The interception of communications

•	The acquisition and disclosure of data relating to communications

•	The carrying out of surveillance

•	The use of covert human intelligence sources

•	Access to electronic data protected by encryption or passwords

•	The appointment of Commissioners and the establishment of a tribunal with
jurisdiction to oversee these issues.199

172.	There are a number of criticisms of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act
including the number of bodies which are authorised to access private information,200 its
complexity and whether its provisions are appropriate given the advancements in
technology since it was drafted. This is not the first time in this Parliament which we have
had cause to highlight inadequacies with the Act. In our 2011 report on the Unauthorised
tapping into or hacking of mobile communications we commented on the confusion
concerning the interpretation of Section 2 of the Act and the impact which that had had on
subsequent decisions to investigate and prosecute allegations of unlawful behaviour on the
part of the media.201 In 2006, then-President of the Investigatory Powers Tribunal Lord
Justice Mummery acknowledged that in the experience of the tribunal the Act had been “a
complex and difficult piece of legislation.”202 The Interception of Communications
Commissioner acknowledged that there was a case for simplifying the Act although he

199	Home Affairs Committee, Fifth Report of Session 2007-08, A Surveillance Society?, HC 58-I, para 312

200	Ibid., para 317

201	Home Affairs Committee, Thirteenth Report of Session 2010-12, Unauthorised tapping into or hacking of mobile

communications. HC 907, para 22-35

202	C v the Police and Secretary of State for the Home Department (IPT/03/32/H, 14 November 2006), para 22.

68 Counter-terrorism

didn’t consider it a priority.203 The Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation told us
that

certainly one can make the case that the Regulation of Investigatory Powers
Act, although only 12 years old, has already been overtaken by developments
in technology and I could well understand the argument for revisiting some
of the powers in that Act.204

The Data Retention Directive and Section 94 of the Telecommunications
Act 1984.

173.	A number of our witnesses have highlighted the importance of the collection of data
communications in regards to criminal investigations. The Home Secretary has informed
us that

Access to communications data is an important tool for our law enforcement
and security services. It is the case that communications data have obviously
been used in—I think—every major counter-terrorism piece of work over the
past decade and well over 90% of organised crime cases. This is very
important. It is about us being able to identify people who would do us harm
and an engage in serious and organised criminality.205

The Interception of Communications Commissioner has recently warned that

I believe, beyond question that technological developments relating to the
internet may make the public authorities interception and communications
data legitimate activities in the public interest more difficult. Recent
commentary has tended towards confining the public authorities
interception and communications data powers and activities. There is a
legitimate policy question whether those capabilities might not need to be
enhanced in the national interest. Present public sentiment might not favour
that, and changes would obviously need to be very carefully weighed with
interests of privacy. But perhaps that policy question should not be
completely overlooked.206

This is a view shared by Charles Farr207 and in the Government’s annual review of the
CONTEST strategy, it was noted that existing legislation is no longer sufficient to ensure
that it is always possible for law enforcement and the security and intelligence agencies to
obtain domestic communications data from communications companies.208 Sir David
Omand, former Director of GCHQ, has argued that “Democratic legitimacy demands that
where new methods of intelligence gathering and use are to be introduced they should be

203	Q661

204	Q117

205	Q329, HC 235

206	20 1 3 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner, HC 1184, April 2014, p56.

207	Q204

208 CONTFST Annual Report 2013, Home Office, April 2014, Cm 8848

Counter-terrorism 69

on a firm legal basis and rest on parliamentary and public understanding of what is
involved.”209 He told the Committee that he did not believe that had been achieved.210 The
recent ruling by the European Court of Justice, striking down the Data Retention Directive
which required telecoms companies to store the communications data of EU citizens for
up to two years, is likely to further increase debate around whether legislation is sufficient.
When we asked the Home Secretary what impact the ruling had on the provision of
communications data, she stated that work was currently being undertaken to assess the
implications of the ruling.211

174.	It is essential that the legal position be resolved clearly and promptly. It is
currently unclear whether CSPs are obliged to store communications data as they were
previously, or indeed if they are allowed to, because of the Data Protection Act. It is also
unclear if the Home Office will continue to pay CSPs for their work on
communications data.

175.	The report by the Joint Committee which examined the draft Data Communications
bill in 2012 highlighted that not all communications data collection is undertaken under
the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000. The Committee noted that

Section 45 of the Telecommunications Act 1984 provided that the disclosure
of communications data by a person running a public telecommunications
system was prima facie an offence. It was, however, permissible to make a
disclosure for the prevention or detection of crime or for the purposes of any
criminal proceedings, in the interests of national security or in pursuance of a
court order. Section 94 of the 1984 Act enables the Secretary of State to issue
directions to telecommunications operators in the interests of national
security.212

However, unlike the provisions in the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act under which
communications data can be obtained, there is no statutory oversight or review of the use
of Section 94 of the Telecommunications Act 1984.213 When we asked the Minister for
Immigration and Security about the use of Section 94, he told us that it was under the remit
of the Intelligence and Security Committee. He also stated that

Directions under Section 94 can only be issued by a Secretary of State where
he/she considers it is necessary to do so in the interests of national security.
The legislation allows for such directions to be kept secret. It may be
necessary to keep a direction secret because revealing its existence would
damage national security.214

209	Sir David Omand, Jamie Bartlett, Carl Miller, intelligence, Demos, April 2012, p9

210	Q586

211	Home Affairs Committee, The work of the Home Secretary. 8 April 2014, HC 235, Q330

212	Joint Committee on the Draft Communications Data Bill, Draft Communications Data Bill, HC 479

213	Q745

214	CTF0041

70 Counter-terrorism

In fact section 94 of the Telecommunications Act is much broader than only national
security. It states that the directions given by the Secretary of State must be 'in the interests
of national security or relations with the government of a country or territory outside the
United Kingdom'. This latter point about relations with other countries makes it a much
broader power, which could be implemented on any grounds following a request from any
other country for any reason. The grounds for secrecy are even broader still, adding
concerns about 'the commercial interests of any person' to exemptions for national security
and foreign relations. We are disappointed that the Minister left out these important
aspects in his response, as it gives a very different perspective on the breadth of the powers.
Furthermore we understand that the Intelligence and Security Committee have not in fact
looked at the use of this Section and so there is currently no scrutiny of its use by any of the
relevant commissioners or Parliamentarians.

176.	We note that there have been a number of consultations and reviews of the Regulation
of the Investigatory Powers Act since it was passed with amendments to the Act which
have both increased and restricted its scope.215 RIPA is a very unclear piece of legislation.
In the Interception of Communications Commissioner's 2013 report he said

I have very considerable sympathy with those who are hazy about the details

of the legislation. RIPA 2000 is a difficult statute to understand.216

He went on to say that there may be significant institutional overuse of the powers to
access communications data under Chapter II of RIPA.217 He also highlighted the
unreliability and inadequacy of the statistical information provided for RIPA
communications data requests.218 Sir David Omand, former Director of GCHQ, described
sections of RIPA as a little obscure and said “I do not think the ordinary person or Member
of Parliament would be able to follow the Act without a lawyer.”219 Furthermore several
witnesses have noted that there is a current requirement for improved communications
data legislation.220 The ambiguities mentioned here lead us to believe that the Regulation of
Investigatory Powers Act ought to be updated.

177.	Given the criticism which the Regulation of the Investigatory Powers Act is subject
to, we believe that the legislation is in need of review. We recommend that a Joint
Committee of both Houses of Parliament should be appointed in order to hold an
inquiry with the ability to take evidence on the Act with a view to updating it. This
inquiry would aim to bring the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act up to date with
modern technology, reduce the complexity (and associated difficulty in the use of) the
legislation, strengthen the statistical and transparency requirements and improve the
oversight functions as are set out in the current Act. We recommend that the inquiry

215	Both through secondary legislation and the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012

216	2013 Annual Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner. HC 1184, April 2014, pi

217	Ibid., p25

218	Ibid., p24

219	Q589

220	Q204; 687

Counter-terrorism 71

address the areas of concern raised with us concerning communications data and the
oversight of Section 94 of the Telecommunications Act 1984.

72 Counter-terrorism

Annex A: Case chronology of
Mohammed Ahmed Mohamed

The Home Office have provided us with a chronology of their involvement with Mr
Mohamed.

•	On 14 January 2011 Mr Mohamed was arrested and interviewed in Burao, Somaliland
with two other individuals. All three were accused of conspiracy to commit offences
against national security. But Somaliland authorities did not prosecute any of the three
because of insufficient admissible evidence. One individual was released locally; Mr
Mohamed and the third individual, a British national, were subsequently deported to
the UK.

•	On 13 March 2011 Mr Mohamed was deported back to the UK.

•	On 14 March 2011 Mr Mohamed arrived in the UK. He was detained and examined
under Schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act 2000. Following that he was served with a
Control Order and relocated to a town in the east of England.

•	On 12 October 2011 Mr Mohamed was arrested, and subsequently charged and
remanded in custody in relation to 14 breaches of his control order:

•	18 August - failed to call monitoring company as required.

•	27 August - failed to report to police station as required.

•	7 September - failed to call monitoring company as required.

•	11 September - failed to report to police station as required.

•	15 September - failed to call monitoring company as required.

•	23 September - returned late for curfew.

•	28 September - met a person without prior permission.

•	28 September - possession of unauthorised mobile phone.

•	29 September - met a person without prior permission.

•	29 September - went outside his geographical boundary.

•	29 September - entered an internet cafe without permission.

•	30 September - failed to report to police station as required.

•	9 October - failed to call monitoring company as required.

•	11 October 2011 - unauthorised possession of an MP3 player.

Counter-terrorism 73

•	On 21 February 2012 Mr Mohamed was released on bail by the court after successfully
arguing - amongst other reasons - that his trial for breaches should be delayed behind
the High Court review of his control order. The CPS opposed bail but the Judge
decided that, given the length of time Mr Mohamed had spent on remand, bail should
be granted. A TPIM notice was served on Mr Mohamed the same day and he was
moved to Home Office provided accommodation in London.

•	In July 2012 the High Court heard the review of the lawfulness of the Control Order
and TPIM.

•	On 19 October 2012 Lord Justice Lloyd Jones handed down a judgment, upholding
both the Control Order and TPIM.

•	On 29 December 2012 Mr Mohamed was arrested, and subsequently charged and
remanded in custody in relation to six breaches of his TPIM between 22 and 28
December 2013 (failing to report to the police station or reporting late).

•	On 19 April 2013 Mr Mohamed was released on bail by the court (again, the CPS
opposed bail). The High Court had upheld the control order and TPIM in a judgment
handed down on 19 October 2012, but Mr Mohamed argued that his trial for breach
should be delayed behind his appeal against the High Court’s judgment.

•	On 25 July 2013 Mr Mohamed was arrested, and subsequently charged and remanded
in custody in relation to one breach of his TPIM - a ‘tag tamper’ which occurred on 16
May 2013.

•	On 6 August 2013 - Mr Mohamed was released on bail by the court (again, the CPS
opposed bail). He continued to argue that his trial for breaches should be delayed
behind his appeal against the High Court’s judgment upholding the control order and
TPIM.

•	On 1 November 2013 the CPS discontinued the prosecution for the alleged ‘tag tamper’
of 16 May 2013 because challenges to the reliability of the forensic evidence meant that,
in their view, there was no realistic prospect of a conviction. Later that day Mr
Mohamed absconded. His tag sent a tamper alert to the monitoring company, which
was relayed by an automatic email to the Home Office and police. This was followed up
by telephone between the monitoring company, Home Office and police.

•	The police immediately launched an intensive operation to locate Mohamed. Ports and
borders were notified with his photograph and details circulated nationally and
internationally.

•	On 2 November 2013 the Court, on the application of the Home Secretary, lifted the
anonymity order in place in relation to Mohamed.

•	On 3 November 2013 the police appealed for public’s help in locating Mohamed.

74 Counter-terrorism

Annex B: Comparison of the UK and US
oversight systems of the security and
intelligence agencies

1.	Oversight of the Security and Intelligence Services means monitoring their efficiency
and their propriety.221 Examining efficiency would mean scrutinising a Service’s ability to
carry out its remit and to provide value for money. Examining propriety would require
judgement on whether the Service had acted in accordance with the law and its remit in
both its objectives and its activities. Some argue propriety could also include the
examination of a Service’s behaviour in accordance with the ethical or political norms of
the society in which it was based, such as freedom of speech, human rights and privacy.222

2.	A 2007 report on the democratic control of the security services by the Venice
Commission noted the different types of accountability which can exist:

As far as security agencies are concerned, there can be said to be different
types of “accountability”, to the executive, judiciary, parliament and
independent bodies. One can also see the monitoring role of civil society
(NGOs, think tanks etc.) and the media as a form of accountability. In the
delicate area of alleged wrongdoing by government or security personnel, the
attitudes to investigative reporting held by the press and the public, and the
degree of obstruction from government and administration may well be as
important as any formal safeguards which may exist.223

Legislative oversight

3.	The most common method of oversight appears to be a committee of the legislature,
although the use of external review committees is also prevalent. Amongst legislative
committees which oversee the security and intelligence agencies there are a number of
variations in:

•	the powers;

•	the size: and,

221	Controlling and Overseeing Intelligence Services in Democratic States, Marina Caparini, Democratic Control of

Intelligence Services, Born and Caparini (eds), 2007 P 9

222	Controlling and Overseeing Intelligence Services in Democratic States, Marina Caparini, Democratic Control of

Intelligence Services, Born and Caparini (eds), 2007, Pg 17; Balancing Operational Efficiency and Democratic
Legitimacy, Hans Born and Loch K. Johnson, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service
Accountability. Born, Johnson, and Leigh (eds), 2005, Pp 230-232

223	European Commission For Democracy through Law, (Venice Commission) Report on the Democratic Oversight of The

Security Services, 2007, P 16

Counter-terrorism 75

•	the body responsible for nominating and/or approving the membership of the
Committee. All of these can have an impact on the independence and the effectiveness
of such committees.

4.	The two legislatures which are the focus of this note (the US and the UK) both have
legislative committees. In the US, South Africa and Argentina (amongst others), the
oversight committees examine the policy, administrations, operations and legality of the
intelligence services. In the UK, although the remit has recently changed to include
operations (as well as policy and administration), the legality of the work carried out by the
Services is a matter for other bodies—the Commissioners and the Investigatory Powers
Tribunal.224

5.	There are a range of benefits and potential failings of legislative committees whose role is
to oversee the security and intelligence agencies. The benefits include the legislature’s
ability to scrutinise abuse by either the agencies or the executive in their use of intelligence
provided by the agencies. Legislators may also have budgetary approval for the security and
intelligence agencies which will aid in the scrutiny of their activities.225

6.	The shortcomings of legislative committees include:

•	the potential for political deference;

•	the over-identification of the members with the security and intelligence services: and,

•	the danger of the leaking of confidential information provided to the committee.

7.	However, leaks from oversight committees have been rare if non-existent in many
countries. One exception to this trend was in the United States under the Bush
administration where there were leaks from the bureaucracy, Congress and even indeed
the administration. A potential reason given for this was the overly excessive secrecy of the
Bush administration—it is suggested that leaks are often seen as a necessary “corrective
when there is too much secrecy and the public interest is not being served by a high degree
of secrecy.”226

8.	It is sometimes suggested that as well as scrutinising the activities of the security and
intelligence agencies, oversight committees should also act as public defenders of those
agencies. One former director of central intelligence (a position now known by the title of
director of national intelligence) told a Canadian Committee that when congressional
oversight

was first introduced, we fought it all the way. But now we wouldn’t do
without it. When the Agency is falsely maligned by the media there’s

224	Parliamentary and External Oversight of Intelligence Services, Hans Born, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services,

Born and Caparini (eds), 2007,Pg 169,

225	Parliamentary and External Oversight of Intelligence Services, Hans Born, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services,

Born and Caparini (eds), 2007, P 164

226	Controlling and Overseeing Intelligence Services in Democratic States, Marina Caparini, Democratic Control of

Intelligence Services, Born and Caparini (eds), 2007, P 20

76 Counter-terrorism

someone to call who can put the record straight. And when the
Administration doesn’t respond to budgetary requests, there are other folks
on the Hill who understand our needs and can go to bat for us.227

9.	The European Commission for Democracy Through Law (also known as the Venice
Commission) Report on the democratic oversight of the Security Services found that the
executive’s view of the role of the legislative committee will have a huge impact on its
ability to scrutinise of the efficiency, effectiveness and lawfulness of the security and
intelligence agencies. In the vast majority of cases, the oversight committee will rely on the
executive and the agencies to provide information which will aid the committee in its
scrutiny.228 In a number of cases, the membership is nominated or chosen by the executive
and in some cases the chairmanship or the party affiliation of the chairman is decided by
the executive.229 The Venice Commission found that

The detention and interrogation of “enemy combatants” in Afghanistan and
at Guantanamo Bay, extraordinary renditions, alleged secret detention
centres, torture or the use of information obtained by torture in third
countries have led to a growing number of inquiries and reports by national
and international bodies. ... National systems of oversight or accountability
were designed for a different era and to guard against different dangers of
abuse (for instance, interference in domestic politics or civil society by the
agencies). They do not address this concern.230

Expert oversight

10.	In a number of countries, there are expert panels which scrutinise the security and
intelligence agencies. The two best examples of these are

•	the Canadian Security Intelligence Review Committee (SIRC) which supervises the
Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS)

•	the Norwegian Committee for Oversight of the Intelligence, Surveillance and Security
Services.

11.	The Venice Commission highlighted the potential benefits of an expert panel

An expert body allows for greater expertise and time in the oversight of
security and intelligence services and avoids the risks of political division and
grand-standing to which parliamentary committees can be prone. The body
may be full or part-time, but even if it is part-time, the supervision exerted is
likely to be more continuous than that exercised by a parliamentary body, the

227	Canada's Long Road from Model Law to Effective Oversight of Security and Intelligence, Stuart Farson, Who's

Watching the Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service Accountability, Born, Johnson, and Leigh (eds), 2005, P 114

228	European Commission For Democracy through Law, (Venice Commission) Report on the Democratic Oversight of The

Security Services, 2007, P 18

229	Ibid., Pp 37-38

230	Ibid., P 25

Counter-terrorism 77

members of which have many other political interests and responsibilities.
The members’ tenure can be made longer than the standard electoral period,
something which is particularly important as intelligence has, as already
mentioned, a relatively long “learning curve”.231

However, the Commission also noted that in order for it to have any legitimacy, the expert
panel ought to be created under statute as it is necessary to demonstrate that the legislature
is in agreement that scrutiny is better carried out by an independent body. Without
legislative support, an expert panel is unlikely to reassure elected representatives or their
constituents that they are effective in their scrutiny activity.232

12.	Another form of expert scrutiny is the use of Inspectors General which in many
countries review efficiency, effectiveness and the legality of the work of the security and
intelligence agencies. Although an individual will be nominated as the Inspector General,
they will have an office with staff who assist them in their investigations. Australia and New
Zealand both have an Inspector General who oversees their security and intelligence
agencies. In the US, where the system originated, there exists a number of Inspectors
General-each of the agencies which are in executive “establishments” or “designated
federal entities” have statutory inspectors general under the Inspector General Act of 1978,
as amended and there is also an Inspector General for the CIA (under its own statute) and
another for the whole intelligence community (also under separate legislation).233

13.	The Venice Commission summarised the benefits of an Inspector General

the Inspector-General may review the Agency’s activities, investigate
complaints, initiate inspections, audits and investigations on his or her own
initiative, and issue recommendations. ... The Inspector-General’s powers
include questioning agency employees and obtaining access to agency
premises and data. The function of an Inspector-General may be not only to
strengthen executive control but serve as the responsible Minister’s
conscience. An Inspector-General can also, as noted above, to report to, or in
different ways assist, parliamentary or external expert bodies. 234

14.	However, Inspectors General will more usually be a method of executive accountability
(rather than legislative) meaning that they report to the Government although there are
exceptions to this—the South African Inspector General reports to Parliament. A number
of other Inspectors General will have a relationship with the legislature despite reporting to
the executive, several of the US Inspectors General report to Congress and the Australian
Inspector General has an “informal working relationship with parliamentary bodies.”235

231	European Commission For Democracy through Law, (Venice Commission) Report on the Democratic Oversight of The

Security Services, 2007, P 48

232	Ibid., P 50

233	http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/intel/RL32525.pdf

234	European Commission For Democracy through Law, (Venice Commission) Report on the Democratic Oversight of The

Security Services, 2007, P30

235	Making Intelligence Accountable: Legal Standards and Best Practice, Hans Born and Ian Leigh, House of the Parliament

of Norway, 2005, P 111

78 Counter-terrorism

Judicial oversight

15.	There are varying degrees of judicial oversight of the security and intelligence agencies
in different countries. The only form which exists across all jurisdictions is the
accountability which occurs when the subjects of the agencies’ investigations lead to
prosecution. In some countries there exists judicial review if prior authorisation of judicial
warrants is required and in others there is a method of post hoc review of investigative
measures which might be considered intrusive.

16.	There is also judicial accountability if a citizen brings a case against the Government or
the agencies in a civil, constitutional or administration court although the Venice
Commission notes that this

depends upon various factors, inter alia the “accident of litigation”, public
immunity, national views on justiciability and standing requirements.236

Finally in some countries, investigations are judicially directed and so in those countries
there would be a high degree of judicial oversight from the beginning of the investigation.

17.	The Venice Commission notes that the increase of special investigative techniques
(telephone tapping, bugging and video surveillance) and data mining could have a
detrimental impact on the privacy and human rights of individuals, especially as the
restraint of having to demonstrate the collection of such evidence does not necessarily
apply in prosecutions for security crimes. This is further compounded by the fact that most
security-related cases will never reach prosecution and so the legality of the investigation
method will never be examined by a judge if there is no system of prior authorisation.237

236	European Commission For Democracy through Law, (Venice Commission) Report on the Democratic Oversight of The
Security Services, 2007, Pp42-43

237	Ibid., P 46

Counter-terrorism 79

UK system of oversight
History

18.	Nominally, MI5 sits under the purview of the Home Secretary and MI6 and GCHQ are
under the purview of the Foreign Secretary. However, unlike the usual convention whereby
the directors general of Government agencies are directly responsible to the Secretary of
State, the heads of the security and intelligence agencies have statutory responsibility for
the actions of their agencies and report directly to the Prime Minister. This system has
been designed to ensure the political neutrality of the agencies. Part of this convention
resulted in the assumption that the Secretary of State would receive advice from the heads
of the agencies but would not see the intelligence upon which the advice was based. This
has changed since the security and intelligence agencies have been constituted under
statute as in the UK there is no prior judicial authorisation requirement (unlike most other
western countries) for surveillance such as interception of communications. Instead the
Secretary of State fulfils this oversight function, signing warrants as requested by the
security and intelligence agencies. This requires evidence to be presented to the Secretary of
State. There are also instances concerning the deportation of foreign nationals on the
grounds of national security and immunity from liability under UK law for actions taken
abroad which involve a similar process of presentation of evidence.238

19.	The UK’s intelligence and security agencies were not recognised in statute until 1989
(MI5) and 1994 (MI6 and GCHQ) when a ruling from the European Court of Human
Rights required them to be to be placed upon a statutory basis. Originally the Intelligence
and Security Committee was set up by the same 1994 act, the Intelligence Services Act,
which means that it is a statutory Committee (unlike most Committees of Parliament
which have been set up by Parliamentary Standing Order) meaning that that section of the
Act would have to be repealed if the Government or Parliament wished to see the ISC
disbanded.

20.	The ISC was set up as a Committee of 9 parliamentarians, nominated and appointed by
the Prime Minister after consultation with the leader of the opposition. The Chairman of
the Committee was also appointed in the same manner. The Committee were then
required to produce an annual report to the Prime Minister who, in consultation with the
ISC, would then redact any information considered to be harmful to national security
before presenting the report to Parliament at a time of his or her choosing.239

21.	Jacqui Smith, the then-Home Secretary, told the House of Commons that in the view of
the executive the role of the UK’s Intelligence and Security Committee is to assure the
public that the “security and intelligence agencies are fulfilling their lawful duties efficiently
and effectively.”240 This led one academic to question what the Committee should do if it

238	Intelligence and the Law in the United Kingdom, Ian Leigh, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence,

Loch K. Johnson (eds), 2012, Pp 644-5

239	http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1994/13/section/10

240	HC Deb, 17 July 2008, col 455

80 Counter-terrorism

finds evidence of activities which would diminish public trust in the security and
intelligence agencies. Should it publish the evidence of such wrongdoing despite the fact
that such publication would undermine public trust in the agencies? Alternatively would
the publication of such material increase faith in the scrutiny of the services and thus
improve public trust on the basis that on the occasions that the agencies act in a manner
that is unlawful or unethical, such behaviour is highlighted and criticised publicly by those
who oversee the agencies.241

22.	In the 2011 Justice and Security Green Paper, the Government highlighted the
possibility of introducing a British Inspector General in place of two of the Commissioners
who currently oversee the security and intelligence agencies—the Interception of
Communications Commissioner who reviews the warrant issuing process, ministers’ and
agencies’ performance in acquiring and disclosing communications data and the process
by which agencies other than intelligence and military gain access to encrypted data and
the Intelligence Services Commissioner who reviews procedures regarding warrants for the
‘interference with property’, electronic surveillance, ‘covert human intelligence sources’
(CHIS) and the requirement for the disclosure of encrypted data. One academic has noted
that the public documents produced by these two commissioners “refer almost entirely to
basic errors e.g. errors in transposition of telephone numbers rather than providing a
broader review of the propriety of covert surveillance operations.”242 When it was
published the Justice and Security Bill did not contain provisions for an Inspector General
meaning that non-Parliamentary oversight is still divided between the Commissioners and
the Investigatory Powers Tribunal (discussed in more detail below) which hears
complaints regarding the infringement of rights by the security and intelligence agencies or
public authorities under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000.

23.	The statute concerning the Intelligence and Security Committee was then amended by
the Justice and Security Act 2013 which made the following changes:

•	Parliament now appoints the 9 members of the Committee (although it can only
appoint members who have been nominated by the Prime Minister in consultation
with the Leader of the Opposition)

•	The Chair of the Committee is now chosen by the membership of the Committee

•	It broadened the remit of the ISC to allow it to examine operational matters under
certain circumstances

•	It required the Committee to report to Parliament although the Prime Minister is still,
in consultation with the ISC, able to redact the report

241	"A Very British Institution": The Intelligence and Security Committee and Intelligence Accountability in the United

Kingdom, Mark Phythian, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence, Loch K. Johnson (eds), 2012, P 713

242	http://consultation.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/iusticeandsecuritv/wp-content/uploads/2012/51 Peter%20Gill%20-

Universitv%20of%20l iverpool.pdf

Counter-terrorism 81

•	It no longer allows the head of the security and intelligence agencies to refuse to
provide information to the ISC (although the relevant Secretary of State can still refuse
to allow the ISC access to any information he or she decides that such information is
‘sensitive’, should not be disclosed ‘in the interests of national security’ or it is
‘information of such a nature that, if the Secretary of State were requested to produce it
before a Departmental Select Committee of the House of Commons, the Secretary of
State would consider (on grounds which were not limited to national security) it proper
not to do so.’)

•	Witnesses to the Committee are given the benefit of their evidence to the ISC being
barred from use in any criminal, civil or disciplinary proceedings (unless the evidence
was given in bad faith)243

Parliamentary accountability

24.	As well as producing annual reports, the Committee has also undertaken thematic
inquiries, sometimes at their own initiation and sometimes at the request of the
Government.244 This has included operational activities prior to the statutory ability to
examine such activity being introduced in the Justice and Security Act 2013. The
Committee has also examined the work of the Joint Intelligence Committee, the work of
the Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre and Defence Intelligence despite it not being part of
their statutory remit.

25.	Academics have highlighted a number of achievements of the Intelligence and Security
Committee. The Committee operates in a bipartisan fashion and its lack of public evidence
sessions mean that there is no ‘grandstanding’ amongst its members. It has largely satisfied
calls for public accountability of the security and intelligence agencies. The executive has a
high regard and level of trust in its ability to scrutinise and it has a good working
relationship with the agencies it scrutinises. One academic noted (prior to the Justice and
Security Act 2013) that the ISC had worked well, despite its weak legal powers.245 There
have been no leaks of sensitive information from the Committee.246 Another academic has
noted that most commentators found that in its first decade of existence the ISC had
performed “creditably in general but poorly over the issue of Iraq.”247 Further criticisms
have been levelled at the Committee’s work on the 7/7 bombings and their rendition
inquiry.

243	http://www.leaislation.aov.uk/ukpaa/2013/18/schedule/1/enacted

244	For instance, the Mitrokhin archives, the Bali Bombing and the continuation of the Gibson rendition inquiry.

245	Accountability of Security and Intelligence in the United Kingdom, Ian Leigh, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing

Intelligence Service Accountability, Born, Johnson, and Leigh (eds), 2005, Pp91-95

246	"A Very British Institution": The Intelligence and Security Committee and Intelligence Accountability in the United

Kingdom, Mark Phythian, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence, Loch K. Johnson (eds), 2012, P704

247	Theories of Intelligence, Peter Gill, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence, Loch K. Johnson (eds),

2012, P53

82 Counter-terrorism

Failures of parliamentary accountability

26.	There have been a number of instances where the Intelligence and Security Committee
have been criticised for its level of scrutiny of the agencies.

Provision of information

27.	There have been a number of criticisms of the provision of information both by and to
the Intelligence and Security Committee. Early on in its existence, the ISC tried to convince
the Government that the Single Intelligence Account (whereby the House of Commons
agrees an overall budget for the security and intelligence agencies without revealing the
allocations for each agency) was unnecessary.248 The Government has refused despite the
fact that the heads of the agencies have apparently indicated that they do not believe it to be
sensitive information.249 The ISC have also unsuccessfully tried to persuade the
Government to allow it access to the confidential annexes of the report of the Intelligence
Services Commissioner and the Interception of Communications Commissioner.250

28.	The ISC’s 2006-07 annual report highlighted that the Government was refusing to
allow it access to a ministerial submission on the basis that the Committee had been ‘given
categorical assurances’ as to what had happened. The Committee was also told that as the
submission was to a previous administration, the Government could not release it despite
assurances from the Foreign Secretary who had received the submission indicating
willingness to see the document released to the Committee. The annual report noted that

The primary reason for this refusal has been that the Committee was told all
the relevant information from the submission and therefore has no need to
see the actual document. Additional reasons cited have been: that the police
were conducting an investigation (the following year); that the submission
would be outside the remit of the Committee (later the same year); and that
the papers remain sensitive as defined in Schedule 3 of the Intelligence
Services Act and there is no public interest argument for the Committee to
see the papers (four years after the original request for the papers).251

29.	The Committee has also previously criticised the lack of openness in the testimony of
the then-Secretary of State for Defence when he gave evidence to their inquiry into the
suggestion that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction. A 2010 academic paper highlighted
that

Questions have also been raised about the ISC’s reliance on the agencies to
supply information in response to requests from the Committee, and the role
of ministers acting as “gatekeepers” in the provision of that information

248	Intelligence and Security Committee, Annual Report 2001-2002, June 2002, Command Paper 5542, para 26

249	Accountability of Security and Intelligence in the United Kingdom, Ian Leigh, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing

Intelligence Service Accountability, Born, Johnson, and Leigh (eds), 2005, Pg 89

250	The UK's Intelligence and Security Committee, Ian Leigh, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services, Born and

Capriana (eds), 2007, P 190

251	Intelligence and Security Committee, Annual Report 2006-2007, January 2008, Command Paper 7299, para 125

Counter-terrorism 83

(Wadham, 1994; Gill, 1996). These concerns have been reinforced by reports
from the ISC itself about a lack of candour on the part of Ministers (ISC,
2003), and prominent recent cases in which the Committee has revisited
earlier enquiries to take account of material which was not made available to
them at the time of their original investigations (ISC, 2009a, 2009b).252

30.	The ISC has been criticised regarding its own provision of information to the public. It
has compared unfavourably to both Australia’s Parliamentary oversight Committee253 and
Canada’s Security Intelligence Review Committee in terms of the level of detail included in
their reports.254 Its report in to Iraqi Weapons of Mass Destruction was also deemed to
have been less informative than either the Hutton inquiry or the Butler review. 255

Iraq

31.	The ISC’s report on the intelligence and assessments around Iraqi Weapons of Mass
Destruction led to significant criticism of the Committee. The Hutton report published
many of the documents which the ISC had examined but decided not to publish and the
Butler report highlighted information about MI6 withdrawing intelligence which the ISC
had failed to examine in their report.256 Furthermore, it later emerged that the Committee
had not been provided with all the relevant JIC assessments by the Government despite
assurances to the contrary. The ISC later concluded that this had been a mistake rather
than a deliberate attempt to mislead the Committee but still expressing considerable
concern that such a mistake could take place. One academic described this as a “masterful
understatement” given the nature of the inquiry.257

7/7 bombing

32.	In May 2006, the ISC published their report in to the July 2005 bombings. In relation to
the surveillance of two of the bombers by the security service as part of an operation
investigating a separate terrorist plot (Operation Crevice), the ISC stated

The Security Service did not seek to investigate or identify them at the time
although we have been told that it would probably have been possible to do
so had the decision been taken. The judgement was made (correctly with
hindsight) that they were peripheral to the main investigation and there was

252	Bochel, H, Defty, A & Dunn, A, 'Scrutinising the Secret State: Parliamentary Oversight of the Intelligence and Security

Service' (2010) 38(3) Policy and Politics 483

253	Intelligence and the Law in the United Kingdom, Ian Leigh, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence,

Loch K. Johnson (eds), 2012, P 647

254	Accountability of Security and Intelligence in the United Kingdom, Ian Leigh, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing

Intelligence Service Accountability, Born, Johnson, and Leigh (eds), 2005, Pg 89

255	The UK's Intelligence and Security Committee, Ian Leigh, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services, Born and

Capriana (eds), 2007, Pp 192-194. Also, "A Very British Institution": The Intelligence and Security Committee and
Intelligence Accountability in the United Kingdom, Mark Phythian, The Oxford Handbook of National Security
Intelligence, Loch K. Johnson (eds), 2012, P 707

256	Ibid.

257	The UK's Intelligence and Security Committee, Ian Leigh, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services, Born and

Capriana (eds), 2007, Pp 193

84 Counter-terrorism

no intelligence to suggest they were interested in planning an attack against
the UK. Intelligence at the time suggested that their focus was training and
insurgency operations in Pakistan and schemes to defraud financial
institutions. As such, there was no reason to divert resources away from
other higher priorities, which included investigations into attack planning
against the UK.258

However following the conviction of those subject to investigation as part of Operation
Crevice (a plot to plant explosives in a number of highly populated areas), the then-shadow
Home Secretary called for a further, public, inquiry as a result of the details which had
emerged at the trial.

After the 7/7 bombings, the then Home Secretary told us that the attack came
out of the blue. The security agencies briefed the press that the suicide
bombers were all unknown to them. We now know that that was not true.
Two of the 7 July bombers had been under surveillance for more than a year.
MI5 dropped the surveillance. It said that that was unavoidable, based on the
surveillance resources available to it. As the Home Secretary has said many
times, there will never be a 100 per cent. guarantee against terrorism—and
we do not expect that, but some mistakes are inevitable and some are not. 259

33.	The Government had already decided that it would ask the ISC to re-investigate and to
publish a detailed document which answered the “questions that have been posed before,
during and after this trial.”260 The then-shadow Home Secretary indicated that he was not
satisfied with the actions being taken.

His web-based response is not the answer. The ISC does not have the
investigative capacity to give the answer.261

As one academic later noted, the Government’s decision to ask the ISC to reinvestigate the
matter implied that they had not previously had access to all material and that their
previous conclusions had been undermined by the emergence of details in the prosecution
of the Operation Crevice subjects. He suggests that such a situation was a “catch-22
situation which could only further undermine its credibility with Parliament and the

public.”262

Rendition

258	Intelligence and Security Committee, Report into the London Terrorist Attacks on 7 July 2005, May 2006, Command

Paper, 6785, Para 48

259	HC Deb, 30 Apr 2007: Col 1235

260	Ibid.

261	Ibid.

262	"A Very British Institution": The Intelligence and Security Committee and Intelligence Accountability in the United

Kingdom, Mark Phythian, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence, Loch K. Johnson (eds), 2012, P 709

Counter-terrorism 85

34.	In their July 2007 report on rendition, the Committee reported that in the case of
Binyam Mohamed, the Security Service had not had any contact with Binyam Mohamed
after a 2002 interview in Pakistan and that

There is a reasonable probability that intelligence passed to the Americans
was used in [Binyam Mohamed] al-Habashi’s subsequent interrogation. We
cannot confirm any part of al-Habashi’s account of his detention or
mistreatment after his transfer from Pakistan.263

35.	However, in legal action by Binyam Mohamed against the UK Government requiring
information for his defence against possible prosecution in the US, it later emerged that not
only had the Security Service been in contact with their US counterparts regarding Mr
Mohamed, they had provided their counterparts with a list of further questions to be put to
him in 2003. There was also evidence that the Security Service had been kept informed by
US officials as to treatment he was subject to which was later judged by a US court to
amount to torture. In his judgement on the case, Lord Neubeurger highlighted the fact that
the Security Service had mislead the Intelligence and Security Committee.

It is also germane that the Security Services had made it clear in March 2005,
through a report from the Intelligence and Security Committee, that “they
operated a culture that respected human rights and that coercive
interrogation techniques were alien to the Services’ general ethics,
methodology and training” (paragraph 9 of the first judgment), indeed they
“denied that [they] knew of any ill-treatment of detainees interviewed by
them whilst detained by or on behalf of the [US] Government” (paragraph
44(ii) of the fourth judgment). Yet, in this case, that does not seem to have
been true: as the evidence showed, some Security Services officials appear to
have a dubious record relating to actual involvement, and frankness about
any such involvement, with the mistreatment of Mr Mohamed when he was
held at the behest of US officials. I have in mind in particular witness B, but
the evidence in this case suggests that it is likely that there were others.264

36.	The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights discussed the implications of
this case in their 2009 report ‘Allegations of UK Complicity in Torture’, noting that

In particular, we doubt whether Parliament or the public has been convinced
by the ISC that the security services always operate within the law and that
transgressions of the law are appropriately dealt with. We would welcome
greater transparency in the ISC’s proceedings, such as public evidence
sessions, but procedural innovations will not be sufficient to convince us, and
the public, that the Government is being held to account.

The missing element, which the ISC has failed to provide, is proper
ministerial accountability to Parliament for the activities of the Security
Services. In our view, this can be achieved without comprising individual

263	Intelligence and Security Committee, Rendition, July 2007, Command Paper 7171, Conclusion M

264	http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2010/65.htm l

86 Counter-terrorism

operations if the political will exists to provide more detailed information to
Parliament about the policy framework, expenditure and activities of the
relevant agencies. The current situation, in which Ministers refuse to answer
general questions about the Security Services, and the Director General of
MI5 will answer questions from the press but not from parliamentarians, is
simply unacceptable.265

Such thoughts have been echoed following the recent decision to ask the ISC to revisit its
rendition report after a judge-led (Gibson) inquiry in to rendition had been unable to
complete its work due to criminal investigations into a number of cases where rendition
had been alleged. Following the announcement that the ISC would take over from the
Gibson inquiry, the shadow Minister asked what steps were being taken to address
perceptions that the ISC’s inquiry would be a whitewash266 and the Chairman of the APPG
on rendition asked

The Minister has said that the ISC will complete this work, but what
confidence can the public have in its conclusions when that same body
wrongly concluded that Britain was not involved in 2007, only to be flatly
contradicted by a High Court ruling the following year? Is it not the case that
the ISC’s new powers about which we have just heard are in any case heavily
qualified-papers may be withheld on grounds of sensitivity and the ISC’s
remit on operational matters is only permitted in certain circumstances?267

Other systems of accountability

37.	As well as the ISC, oversight of the security and intelligence agencies is carried out by
two commissioners (the Intelligence Services Commissioner and the Interception of
Communications Commissioner) and the Investigatory Powers Tribunal. Both of the
Commissioners are former senior Judges and the members of the Tribunal must be senior
members of the legal profession to be appointed with the President and the Vice-President
having held high judicial office.268

The Intelligence Services Commissioner and the Interception of
Communications Commissioner

38.	The Commissioners gain their statutory remit from the Regulation of Investigatory
Powers Act 2000 (and the Intelligence Services Act 1994). They monitor the security and
intelligence agencies’ (amongst others) compliance with the statutory requirements in
relation to their operations. This is post-hoc monitoring, a fact that has been subject to
criticism as there are suggestions that such oversight should take place prior to

265	Joint Committee on Human Rights, Twenty-third Report of Session 2008-09, Allegations of UK Complicity in Torture

HC 230, paras 64-65

266	HC Deb, 19 Dec 2013: Col 917

267	HC Deb, 19 Dec 2013: Col 921

268	http://www.ipt-uk.com/docs/IPTAnnualReportFINAI .PDF

Counter-terrorism 87

operations.269 Such monitoring is of the warrants and authorising decisions prepared for
and issued by agency personnel rather than the examination of individual cases. The
Commissioners do not deal with complaints, which are instead directed to the
Investigatory Powers Tribunal.

The Investigatory Powers Tribunal

39.	The Investigatory Powers Tribunal is also formed under the Regulation of Investigatory
Powers Act 2000 with a remit to investigate individual’s complaints against the security
and intelligence services as well as other bodies who have powers under RIPA. The
Tribunal rarely hears cases in public and there are no obligations upon the tribunal to allow
the complainant or their legal representatives to be present during a hearing. Up to 2012,
the Investigatory Powers Tribunal has received 1468 complaints. It has found in favour of
at least 10 of those complainants (the IPT did not publish statistics relating to cases which
had been determined in favour of the complainant in 2012, unlike previous years).

Year	Total complaints	Complaints upheld
2000 and 2001	102	0
2002	130	0
2003	109	0
2004	90	0
2005	80	1
2006	86	0
2007	66	0
2008	136	2
2009	157	1
2010	164	6
2011	180	0
2012	168	unknown
Total	1468	10

Data taken from Reports of the Interception of Communications Commissioner and the website of the
Investigatory Powers Tribunal

It has been highlighted by campaigners however that half of these upheld complaints were
members of the same family who complained jointly. The IPT has therefore determined in
favour of the complainant in a maximum of six cases.270

40.	The absence of successful complaints has been used by some academics to demonstrate
that the Investigatory Powers Tribunal is overly protective of state security and ought to be
replaced by another form of oversight. One suggestion is to replace the Commissioners and
the IPT with an independent Inspector General.271 This concept featured in the current
Government’s Justice and Security Green paper but was not adopted in the bill. In response
to the green paper, one academic stated

269	http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/24 09 13 fo4 secrecvandsurveillance.pdf

270	http://news.bbc.co.Uk/1/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/24 09 13 fo4 secrecvandsurveillance.pdf

271	Accountability of Security and Intelligence in the United Kingdom, Ian Leigh, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing

Intelligence Service Accountability, Born, Johnson, and Leigh (eds), 2005, P95; Intelligence and the Law in the United
Kingdom, Ian Leigh, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence, Loch K. Johnson (eds), 2012, P648

88 Counter-terrorism

The fact that these institutions do not provide comprehensive oversight of
the intelligence agencies has been exposed by the 'torture' cases. It could be
argued that the structures, originally designed in late 1980s to respond to or
head off ECtHR decisions were designed mainly to provide minimal
compliance with the ECHR, which they have done.272

272 http://consultation.cabinetoffice.aov.uk/iusticeandsecuritv/wp-content/uploads/2012/51 Peter%20Gill%20-

Universit.y%20of%20l iverpool.pdf

Counter-terrorism 89

US system of oversight
History

41.	The 1960s and early 70s in the United States were a period of protest and civil unrest. A
number of allegations about the intelligence activities of a number of Government
Agencies surfaced. There were a number of congressional investigations into various
allegations about the US Army, the FBI, the CIA and other agencies. These investigations
found evidence of abuses against American citizens including:

•	Illegal reading of private mail by the CIA;

•	Over 1 million unauthorised CIA and FBI files on individuals;

•	Electronic eavesdropping on private telephone conversations by the NSA;

•	100,000 unauthorised background checks by Army intelligence units;

•	The unauthorised release of individual’s tax records by the Inland Revenue Service;

•	CIA infiltration of religious, media and academic organisations;

•	CIA manipulation of foreign elections: and,

•	CIA (unsuccessful) attempts to assassinate two foreign leaders.273

It was the discovery of these abuses which led to the creation of permanent select
committees on intelligence in the Senate in 1976 and the House of Representatives in 1977.

Congressional accountability

42.	There are no official limits on the remit of Congressional Committees which mean that
they can determine the scope of their inquiries.274 However, the US has 16 different
intelligence agencies based across the Department of Defense, the Justice Department, the
Department of Homeland Security and the Treasury Department.275 Therefore jurisdiction
of congressional oversight is spread over a number of committees - Appropriation, Armed
Services, Judiciary and Homeland Security all have aspects of intelligence as part of their
remit.276 One finding from the 9/11 Congressional Commission was that Congress needed

273	The United States Department of Defense Intelligence Oversight Programme: Balancing National Security and

Constitutional Rights, George B. Lotz, II, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services, Born and Caparini (eds), 2007, P
113

274	Accounting for the Future or the Past?: Developing Accountability and Oversight Systems to Meet Future Intelligence

Needs, Stuart Farson and Reg Whitaker, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence, Loch K. Johnson
(eds), 2012, P 688

275	National Security Intelligence, Loch K. Johnson, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence, Loch K.

Johnson (eds), 2012, P 7

276	Governing in the Absence of Angels: On the Practice of Intelligence Accountability in the United States, Loch K.

Johnson, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service Accountability, Born, Johnson, and Leigh
(eds), 2005, P 67

90 Counter-terrorism

to overhaul its oversight of intelligence as the system was dysfunctional. However, although
a number of the Commission’s recommendations, such as the creation of a Director of
National Intelligence, have been implemented, congressional oversight has not been
reformed and discussions around the most effective form of oversight are still
continuing.277

Failures of Congressional accountability

43.	Despite being one of the World’s most powerful oversight bodies, Congress remains
dependent on willingness of representatives to engage in routine oversight and on the
administration (the White House and Government Departments) to keep Committees
informed.278 There are numerous examples in Congress’ history of Committees being
misled by officials (as during the Iran-Contra affair and during a Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence inquiry on links between the CIA and a Guatemalan military officer);
refusing to provide documents or appear before Committees: and, providing large
amounts of irrelevant material in order to keep the Committee distracted from its
purpose.279

44.	As well as the issues of divided jurisdiction across a range of Committees, analysts have
also suggested that congressional oversight is less effective when the President, Senate and
House all have same political leadership.280 The dedication of the members of the oversight
committees can also impact upon the effectiveness of scrutiny. One study found that
between 1975 and 1990, although members turned up for high-profile sessions which dealt
with areas where mistakes had been made, attendance at the regular sessions was on
average, roughly a third of the total membership of the committee.281

45.	Furthermore there is an acceptance of some members on the Senate282 and House
Permanent Select Committees on Intelligence that their role is to advocate on behalf of the
security and intelligence agencies. In a staff study produced by the House Committee in
1996, it was noted that

277	The Politics of Intelligence Accountability, Glenn Hastedt, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence, Loch

K. Johnson (eds), 2012, P 726,

278	Balancing Operational Efficiency and Democratic Legitimacy, Hans Born and Loch K. Johnson, Who's Watching the

Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service Accountability, Born, Johnson, and Leigh (eds), 2005, P 229

279	Governing in the Absence of Angels: On the Practice of Intelligence Accountability in the United States, Loch K.

Johnson, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service Accountability, Born, Johnson, and Leigh
(eds), 2005, P 70

280	Accounting for the Future or the Past?: Developing Accountability and Oversight Systems to Meet Future Intelligence

Needs, Stuart Farson and Reg Whitaker, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence, Loch K. Johnson
(eds), 2012, P 681

281	Governing in the Absence of Angels: On the Practice of Intelligence Accountability in the United States, Loch K.

Johnson, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service Accountability, Born, Johnson, and Leigh
(eds), 2005, P 68

282	Governing in the Absence of Angels: On the Practice of Intelligence Accountability in the United States, Loch K.

Johnson, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service Accountability, Born, Johnson, and Leigh
(eds), 2005, P 70

Counter-terrorism 91

Each committee charged with congressional oversight has a dual
responsibility. The most obvious is to oversee the various agencies under its
mandate, approve their budgets, investigate known or suspected problems,
and report back to the House on these matters. Recognizing the impossibility
of each Member being conversant with (or intensely interested in) all issues,
the committee system delegates responsibility to the committees and accepts
their leadership in specific areas. Given the checks and balances nature of the
congressional-executive relationship, each committee has, at some level, an
adversarial role with its Executive Branch opposites. The relationship need
not be overtly or continuously hostile, but there is inevitably a certain
amount of friction involved.

The responsibility for being the House's resident experts on given programs
and agencies also gives rise to a second role for each oversight committee,
that of advocacy for those agencies and programs. It is only natural that those
Members most interested in and most conversant with agencies and
programs will also, on occasion, be their advocates. Increasingly constrained
debates over budget shares, disinterest or outright hostility from other
Members about agencies or programs for a wide variety of reasons, all put
oversight committees in this advocacy role as well.283

This advocacy role can be further demonstrated by the fact that Committee members have
previously highlighted their desire to ensure that the security and intelligence agencies do
not lack resources or access to technology.284 The balance between scrutiny and advocacy is
not always apparent to the public as the Senate and House Permanent Select Committees
on Intelligence rarely report to the public, seldom hold open hearings and have websites
with little information.285

Other systems of accountability

46.	As with the UK there are a number of other systems of oversight when it comes to the
US security and intelligence agencies. The recent report by the President’s review group on
intelligence and communications technology noted that

One thing that makes United States intelligence collection unique is the
degree of oversight and control by high-level officials, elected legislative
members, and the judiciary ... No other intelligence services in the world are

283	http://www.apo.aov/fdsvs/pka/GPO-IC21/html/GPO-IC21-15.html

284	Governing in the Absence of Angels: On the Practice of Intelligence Accountability in the United States, Loch K.

Johnson, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service Accountability. Born, Johnson, and Leigh
(eds), 2005, P 62

285	Governing in the Absence of Angels: On the Practice of Intelligence Accountability in the United States, Loch K.

Johnson Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service Accountability. Born, Johnson, and Leigh (eds),
2005, P 64

92 Counter-terrorism

subjected to the degree of policy, legislative, and judicial review now applied
to the US Intelligence Community.286

The US security and intelligence agencies are subject to oversight and enforcement from
the:

•	Legislative Branch

•	Congress - Determines whether and how to authorise/fund intelligence activities
and conducts oversight via intelligence and other committees.

•	Judicial Branch

•	Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) Court - Rules on matters under
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.

•	Executive Branch

•	Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board - Provides privacy/civil liberties advice
and oversight for US Government efforts to protect the nation from terrorism.

•	President’s Intelligence Oversight Board - Reviews reports of potential violations of
law and executive order on behalf of President.

•	Department of Justice - Includes DOJ’s National Security Division and DOJ’s
Privacy and Civil Liberties Office.

•	Office of the Director of National Intelligence-level officials - Includes ODNI’s
Civil Liberties and Privacy Office, ODNI Office of General Counsel, and the
Intelligence Community Inspector General.

•	Department-level officials - At the department level, these can include
departmental counterparts to the agency-level organizations, and may also include
other offices (for example, DOD’s Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for
Intelligence oversight).

•	Agency-level officials - At the agency level, these can include the following
organizations: Offices of General Counsel, Offices of Inspector General, Civil
Liberties and Privacy Offices, Intelligence Oversight Offices, Compliance Offices
(for example, NSA’s new Civil Liberties and Privacy Officer position, and NSA’s
Office of the Director of Compliance).287 *

286	Liberty and Security in a changing world: Report and Recommendations of The President's Review Group on

Intelligence and Communications Technologies, December 2013, pg 166

287	Liberty and Security in a changing world: Report and Recommendations of The President's Review Group on

Intelligence and Communications Technologies, December 2013, pg 269

Counter-terrorism 93

47.	There have also been a number of Commissions ordered by the White House or
Congress which have examined failures by security and intelligence agencies.288 In 1975,
the President set up the Rockefeller Commission which was created in response to a
December 1974 report in The New York Times that the CIA had conducted illegal
domestic activities, including experiments on U.S. citizens, during the 1960s. It was the
discovery of such activities which led to the eventual creation of the Senate and House
Permanent Select Committees on Intelligence. The Aspin-Brown Commission, established
by Congress, followed the Black Hawk Down incident which took place in October 1993.
The purpose of the Commission was to determine how best to adapt the Intelligence
Community to the challenging new world that had emerged following the end of the Cold
War.289 The National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, (also
known as the 9/11 Commission) was set up by Congress in November 2002, to prepare a
full and complete account of the circumstances surrounding the September 11 attacks,
including preparedness for and the immediate response to the attacks. The most recent
special commissions looking at intelligence-related matters was the Presidentially-
mandated Silberman-Robb Commission, otherwise known as the Commission on the
Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction
which reported in 2005. Both the 9/11 Commission and the Silberman-Robb Commission
were critical of the security and intelligence agencies actions prior to 9/11 and the Iraq
War.

Comparison

	Parliament	House	Senate
Number of members	9	21	15
Number of staff	8 and one part-time investigator. 290	3 6 291 292	45292
Membership appointed by	Parliament, following nomination by the Prime Minister who must consult with the Leader of the Opposition	Party leadership	Party leadership
Members vetted prior to appointment293	No	No (but all members of the House of Representatives are automatically given access to classified material upon their election)	No (but all members of the Senate are automatically given access to classified material upon their election)

288	Governing in the Absence of Angels: On the Practice of Intelligence Accountability in the United States, Loch K.

Johnson, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service Accountability. Born, Johnson, and Leigh
(eds), 2005, P 58

289	https://www.cia.gov/librarv/center-for-the-studv-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-

studies/studies/vol48no3/article01 .html

290	CTE0042. Letter from Sir Malcolm Rifkind MP. He notes that there are four full-time vacancies and three part-time

vacancies on the staff of the Committee.

291	http://www.legistorm.com/office/House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence/1538/187.html

292	http://www.leoistorm.com/office/Senate Select Committee on Intelligence/687/189.html

293	Parliamentary and External Oversight of Intelligence Services, Hans Born, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services,

Born and Caparini (eds), 2007, P174

94 Counter-terrorism

Confirmation of appointment of key officials294	No	No	Yes
Access to classified material	Access can be refused by Secretary of State295	Total Access	Total Access
Can reveal classified material without permission from the executive	No	No	Yes, with the approval of the full Senate
Prior notification	No legal duty (although the ISC has informed agencies that it would expect to be 'properly and promptly informed' of their activities.296)	Yes (except in times of emergency when the agency can delay reporting for up to two days)	Yes (except in times of emergency when the agency can delay reporting for up to two days)
Produce annual reports on the work of the Committee	Yes	Yes	Yes

48.	There is an obvious distinction in terms of the resources available to the Committees.
One academic has noted that when the congressional committees held a joint inquiry into
the events of 11 September 2011, they employed 24 researchers and interviewed 300
people. In a comparable piece of work, the ISC interviewed 37.297 The joint inquiry’s team
of researchers was split into five investigative teams who interviewed witnesses, reviewed
documents and sent out questionnaires. These researchers carried out investigative work at
the FBI, CIA and NSA as well as other Departments where they felt they might find further
relevant information. In contrast the ISC does not appear to have used their investigator as
part of their 9/11 inquiry, instead relying on oral evidence from Ministers, Directors
General of the Services and officials.298

49.	Spending on intelligence greatly differs between the two countries with UK security
and intelligence agencies receiving roughly £2 billion a year, as compared to the US
national intelligence programme’s budget of £31.5 billion.299 The greater number of
agencies and the information produced by those agencies means that although US
Committees have greater access to information than their UK counterparts, they also have
more information to sift through. A former director of the NSA once likened intelligence
pouring in to US intelligence agencies as akin to a fire hose being held to the mouth300—

294	The UK's Intelligence and Security Committee, Ian Leigh, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services, Born and

Capriana (eds), 2007, P 183

295	Schedule 1, Part 4 (2) (b)

296	The UK's Intelligence and Security Committee, Ian Leigh, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services, Born and

Capriana (eds), 2007, P 185

297	The UK's Intelligence and Security Committee, Ian Leigh, Democratic Control of Intelligence Services, Born and

Capriana (eds), 2007, P 192

298	Democratic and Parliamentary Accountability of Intelligence Services After 9/11, Peter Gill Democratic Control of

Intelligence Services, Born and Capriana (eds), 2007, P 208

299	http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-securitv/black-budget.-summarv-details-us-spv-net.works-successes-

failures-and-obiec.t.ives/201.3/08/29/7e57bb78-10ab-11e.3-8c.dd-bc.dc.09410972 print.html

300	National Security Intelligence, Loch K. Johnson, The Oxford Handbook of National Security Intelligence, Loch K.

Johnson (eds), 2012, P 20

Counter-terrorism 95

such a metaphor would therefore also be appropriate to the amount of information being
available to US Committees and their ability to examine it all.

50.	The difference in political systems is also significant - whilst it appears that in both the
UK and the US, party leadership is responsible for the nomination of the oversight
committee the difference in systems means that the executive is responsible for nominating
the members of the ISC. In the US, the fact that the House and Senate leadership are able to
be from the opposition party (and that the separation of powers ensures a clear delineation
between the legislature and the executive) means that the nomination of members for the
US committees is a process in which the executive has no role.

96 Counter-terrorism

Conclusion

51.	In 2007, researchers wrote that robust accountability by a legislature relied on three
factors - authority, ability and attitude.301 There are two different approaches to legislative
oversight which are discussed in academic literature - the ‘police-patrol’ and the ‘fire-
alarm’ model. The police-patrol model is defined as the legislature examining a sample of
activities carried out by an executive agency, the idea being that it will detect any activity
which contravenes the legislature’s expectation of practices and that such surveillance will
discourage an agency form engaging in actions which would result in disapproval or action
on the part of the legislature. The fire-alarm model is a more reactive model whereby the
legislature will be alerted to activities which contravene the legislature’s (and the public’s)
expectations of practice by interest groups, the media or even their electorate.302

52.	Whilst the US and UK have similar ‘police-patrol’ bodies within their legislature, their
‘fire-alarm’ bodies differ. In US, responses to perceived failures within the intelligence
community have tended to be presidential or congressional commissions. In contrast, in
the UK, the response in recent times has been to set up an inquiry, usually led by a senior
judicial figure (which is therefore outside of the legislature). However these two approaches
appear to be converging - the UK’s Commission on Banking Standards was similar in its
nature to a Congressional Commission whereas the presidentially-ordered review in to
intelligence and communications technologies could be seen as being similar to an
independent inquiry, such as the Butler Committee.

53.	It has been suggested that oversight committees in both the US and the UK were aware
of the programmes highlighted by Edward Snowden’s leaks to various media outlets.303
Following those leaks there are a number of inquiries being held in various legislatures on
the issue of balancing privacy with security. In the US, the reaction of Congressional
Committees has been to hold inquiries with Judiciary Committees in both the House and
the Senate holding inquiries as well as the Intelligence Committees. It is obvious that the
latitude afforded to congressional committees to examine intelligence matters by the
executive is perhaps the key difference between the US system and the UK system where
the Government consistently refuses to allow committees other than the ISC to ask
questions on the work of the security and intelligence agencies. Given that a number of
important issues have been raised and debated as part of the work of the Judiciary
Committees, it is perhaps telling that the debate has been more charged in the US where
more representatives are able to scrutinise the work of such agencies.

301	Intelligence Services: Strengthening Democratic Accountability, Hans Born and Fairlie Jensen, Democratic Control of

Intelligence Services, Born and Caparini (eds), 2007, P266

302	Governing in the Absence of Angels: On the Practice of Intelligence Accountability in the United States, Loch K.

Johnson, Who's Watching the Spies?: Establishing Intelligence Service Accountability, Born, Johnson, and Leigh
(eds), 2005, Pp59-60

303	http://www.iiss.org/en/politics%20and%20strategy/blogsections/2013-98d0/november-47b6/snowden-9dd1

Counter-terrorism 97

Conclusions and recommendations

Foreign fighters

1.	The number of UK citizens and Westerners travelling to fight in foreign conflicts has
reached alarming levels unlike anything seen in recent years. We require an
immediate response targeted at dissuading and preventing those who wish to go to
fight from going; helping countries who are key to intercepting those who are
entering Syria, and ensuring those who return do not present a danger to the UK.
(Paragraph 58)

2.	We are alarmed by the relative ease by which foreign fighters appear to be able to
cross the border into Syria. It is the responsibility of the international community to
assist transit countries, and the UK must offer practical support to those countries in
securing their borders. We have been impressed by the efforts made to prevent
football hooliganism in foreign countries by sending “spotters” to help pick out those
at risk of committing criminal acts and believe similar practical help would be
beneficial in the fight against terrorism. We recommend that the Government
maintain representation from the UK Counter Terrorism command to help the
Turkish authorities identify those who are at risk of crossing the border into Syria
intending to fight and make available any relevant intelligence to the Turkish
authorities that may be beneficial. The Government should also work with transit
countries such as Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan to better establish who is likely to be
travelling for genuine humanitarian reasons. (Paragraph 59)

3.	The Government needs a clear strategy for dealing with foreign fighters on their
return, which may include help to come to terms with the violence they have
witnessed and participated in, as well as counter-radicalisation interventions. We are
concerned that their experiences may well make them vulnerable to Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder thereby increasing their vulnerability to radicalisation. We
recommend that the Government implement a programme, similar to Channel, for
everyone returning to Britain where there is evidence that they have fought in Syria.
The engagement in this strategy should be linked to any legal penalties imposed on
their return. In developing the strategy the Government must work with mental
health practitioners and academia to ensure that the programme best integrates
those returning from conflict zones such as Syria. (Paragraph 60)

Capacity building

4.	The increasingly diverse and dispersed nature of the threat makes capacity building a
front-line defence against a changing threat landscape. We note that the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office’s budget is limited by available resources but given the
importance of capacity building to the Government’s counter-terrorism efforts we
look to the OSCT and the FCO to reassure us that the Counter-Terrorism Fund will
be maintained at current levels in this and the next financial year. In the light of the
announcement that the Prime Minister is considering using some of the UK’s aid
budget on peace keeping and other defence-related projects, we recommend that

98 Counter-terrorism

within the definitions of Overseas Development Aid, money could be used to
increase resource for capacity building abroad. (Paragraph 75)

5.	We accept that some of the UK’s capacity building programmes are sensitive but we
believe that greater transparency about how much the Government spends on
capacity building overseas and who funds these programmes (i.e. fully by UK
Government or jointly between UK and EU) is crucial for accountability. (Paragraph
78)

6.	We recommend that the Government raise the issue of Interpol databases as part of
discussions around counter-terrorism at the next EU Justice and Home Affairs
Council and encourage others to utilise the tools at their disposal. (Paragraph 85)

7.	Interpol is an international policing organisation with a proven record of success and
should be widely supported. We recommend that the Government take the lead in
working with Interpol and the UK’s international partners to create an international
operational platform supporting terrorist investigations. The UK should use its
pivotal position in the G7 to ensure that this change is achieved. Whilst UK policing
may lack sufficient resources to supply a significant number of staff to such a
platform, we also recommend the Government consider offering to host the
permanent base of the platform. (Paragraph 87)

The UK's response to the terrorist threat

8.	The withdrawal of passports is a vital tool in preventing UK citizens from travelling
to foreign conflicts. We understand the need to use the prerogative power to
withdraw or withhold a citizen’s passport. Given that the estimates of foreign fighters
are in the low hundreds, we are surprised that it has only been used 14 times since
April 2013 and recommend that, in all appropriate circumstances where there is
evidence, the power is utilised as an exceptional preventative and temporary
measure. However, we note that its use is not subject to any scrutiny external to the
executive. We recommend that the Home Secretary report quarterly on its use to the
House as is currently done with TPIMs and allow the Independent Reviewer of
Terrorism Legislation to review the exercise of the Royal Prerogative as part of his
annual review. (Paragraph 96)

9.	We have grave concerns about how effective the deprivation of mono-citizenship
powers will be. Drafting legislation on the basis of an individual case lessens the
impact of the legislation because the exact circumstances are unlikely to repeat
themselves. We support the Minister’s commitment to the power being used
sparingly. We recommend that the Government endeavour to use the power only
when the person subject to the decision is outside the UK. (Paragraph 101)

10.	It is deeply worrying that anyone who is subject to a TPIM, or those who were
subjects of control orders, can abscond with relative ease. We recommend that a
review of the types of measures placed upon subjects needs to be conducted to
ensure that enough is being done to prevent absconsion. (Paragraph 109)

Counter-terrorism 99

11.	So far there have been no jury convictions of breaches of TPIMs or Control Orders
and the CPS needs to bear this in mind when bringing prosecutions. We recommend
that the Government and Crown Prosecution Service produce specific guidance on
investigating and prosecuting breaches. The continued failure to secure a conviction
undermines the system of TPIMs. (Paragraph 112)

12.	Many breaches of a TPIM order are minor infringements which might plausibly
have happened inadvertently. It is therefore right that the CPS does not prosecute
every single breach, considering the cost to the public purse and the difficulty of
convincing a jury of the materiality of the alleged breach without being able to
explain the basis on which the relevant restriction was included in the order. It is
worth noting that no prosecution has been successful following a not-guilty plea and
in only one case has the accused pleaded guilty. In the case of the tag tampering trial,
it is of serious concern that the prosecution was discontinued. Deliberately
tampering with a tag must be viewed as an attempt to abscond and we recommend
that the Home Office request independent testing of the tags provided by G4S to
definitively prove, as they claim, a tag-tamper alert can only be caused through
deliberate actions. This will enable the Home Office to present reliable evidence to
the court that such an alert cannot be caused inadvertently. Given that five
prosecutions for tag tampering have been withdrawn or collapsed it is vital that both
the public and TPIM subjects understand the extent to which it might or might not
be possible for a tag-tamper alert to be innocently caused. (Paragraph 115)

13.	It is essential that the Government engages with those placed on a TPIM whilst they
are subject to the control and not only afterwards. It is a missed opportunity not to
implement a de-radicalisation programme until the subjects are free of the measures.
We recommend that all TPIM subjects are placed on a graduated scheme, which
commences concurrently with the measures, with the sole purpose of engagement
and de-radicalisation. We accept that the anonymity order may cause difficulties in
terms of liaising with the local community when seeking support for that process.
However, we believe that the Government should engage with community leaders
who are working with prisoners and ex-prisoners who have been radicalised in order
to design a programme which would be suitable for TPIM subjects. Such a
programme should take account of the different narratives of radicalisation. Due to
the constraints placed on a subject it is unlikely that they will be eager to engage with
the state or official parts of society. It is disastrous, therefore, for a subject to left
without a constructive path towards reintegration following the end of the measures.
The Government must ensure that an exit strategy is started as soon as the TPIM is
imposed upon a subject. We recommend a continuation of the de-radicalisation
engagement programme which they would have started under the TPIM which
evolves into a more practical scheme enabling the former subject to reconnect with
society through work or education. (Paragraph 120)

14.	We welcome the progress made by internet companies such as Google (who own
YouTube) in the work they are doing to promote counter narratives. We commend
the work by the creators of Abdullah-X and note the importance of peer-led
education. Given the role that social media is playing in the dissemination of
extremist messages we hope that other large multi-national social media companies

100 Counter-terrorism

will follow suit. We note the significance of the independence of funding for these
types of project but recognise the desperate need for more resources to be made
available. We, therefore, recommend that the Government asks the European Union
and other independent funders to prioritise resources for community projects such
as Abdullah-X. (Paragraph 126)

15.	We recommend that the responsibility for countering terrorist financing be given to
the Office for Security and Counter-Terrorism where it will be considered a higher
priority. Although it is not an area where success comes easily, cutting off the flow of
money to terrorist organisations and the identification of foreign fighters are vital to
the UK’s response to the terrorist threat. (Paragraph 129)

16.	We are deeply concerned with the potential for ‘bogus’ charities to dupe members of
the public into raising funds which are eventually used to support terrorist activity.
We recommend that the Charity Commission be granted extra resources and
stronger legal powers to counter the abuse of charities by terrorists. We also
recommend that the Charity Commission be able to undertake unannounced
inspections in order to audit their accounts. (Paragraph 134)

17.	We welcome the Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation’s inquiry in to the
impact of counter-terrorism legislation on charities and recommend that it be
expanded to look at the scale of abuse of charitable status to support terrorist actions.
We recommend that he assess the response to such abuse and suggest changes which
will improve the ability of the authorities to tackle terrorist financing whilst ensuring
that law-abiding charities can continue their vital work. (Paragraph 135)

18.	The National Crime Agency was established as a national mechanism as part of the
changing landscape of policing. Like all new organisations, it is still seeking to
establish a strong identity and its own remit. For instance, we remain concerned that
the NCA does not have full operational capacity in Northern Ireland. The
Metropolitan Police have a wide remit which has many complexities and the current
difficulties faced by the organisation lead us to believe that the responsibility for
counter-terrorism ought to be moved to the NCA in order to allow the Met to focus
on the basics of policing London. The work to transfer the command ought to begin
immediately with a view to a full transfer of responsibility for counter-terrorism
operations taking place, for example within five years after the NCA became
operational, in 2018. When this takes place, it should finally complete the jigsaw of
the new landscape of policing. (Paragraph 141)

19.	Both members of the public and those in private enterprises have to ensure that
vigilance is constant, this is especially important in areas where crowds of people
congregate. Those in charge of areas visited by high numbers of people (such as
shopping centres) must ensure that they have adequate security, surveillance and
response plans. Ensuring public safety cannot be the sole purview of the counter-
terrorism command and the security service, it is a responsibility in which all UK
citizens and companies take a share. We note that the British Council of Shopping
Centres have updated their guidance following the Westgate attack. We recommend
that all police forces ensure that local shopping centres have received this guidance
and put in place and test a Response Plan. (Paragraph 144)

Counter-terrorism 101

Oversight of the security and intelligence agencies

20.	We do not believe the current system of oversight is effective and we have concerns
that the weak nature of that system has an impact upon the credibility of the agencies
accountability, and to the credibility of Parliament itself. The scrutiny of the work of
the security and intelligence agencies should be not the exclusive preserve of the
Intelligence and Security Committee. Whilst we recognise the importance of limiting
the access to documents of a confidential nature, we believe that as the relevant
departmental select committee, we ought to be able to take oral evidence from the
head of the security service. Engagement with elected representatives is not, in itself,
a danger to national security and to continue to insist so is hyperbole. There are
questions about the accuracy of information provided to the House by the security
and intelligence agencies in the past, particularly in 2003. As future decisions on
warfare look likely to be determined by votes of the members of the House of
Commons, there is heightened importance in ensuring that the House is accurately
informed in future. (Paragraph 157)

21.	Furthermore we recommend that the Commons membership of the Intelligence and
Security Committee should be elected like other select committees and that the
Chair, who should always be a member of the Commons, ought to be subject to
election of the whole House, as is the case for Select Committees. We further
recommend that the Chair should always be a member of the largest opposition
party. (Paragraph 158)

22.	The Investigatory Powers Tribunal is the only body which can investigate individual
complaints against the security and intelligence agencies and actions taken under the
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act. It ought to command public confidence in
its actions. For there to be public confidence there must first be public understanding
of the work of the Tribunal. We recommend that the if the Investigatory Powers
Tribunal are unwilling to voluntarily produce a detailed annual report on their work,
that legislation be amended so that they are required to do so. Such an annual report
should, at the very least contain the number of cases it has received and the outcome
of cases determined in that year with comparable data for the previous four years.
We also recommend that the data be broken down to show which agency the
complaint was against. (Paragraph 162)

23.	It is unacceptable that there is so much confusion around the work of the
Intelligence Services Commissioner and the Interception of Communications
Commissioner. We recommend that as a matter of urgency data is collected on how
many applications there were under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act and
how many people were subsequently subject to an application. Furthermore, the fact
that the Intelligence Services Commissioner cannot tell us what percentage of
consolidated guidance cases or disciplinary proceedings he has examined is
concerning. (Paragraph 166)

24.	We have serious doubts that either the Interception of Communications
Commissioner role or the Intelligence Services Commissioner role should be part-
time. We are also concerned that the extent of the Intelligence Services
Commissioner’s staff is one personal assistant. The fact that less than 10% of

102 Counter-terrorism

warrants which allow intrusion in to the private lives of individuals are examined is
concerning—we believe this figure ought to be at least 50%, if not higher. We
recommend that the Commissioners are made full-time positions and that their
resources are increased to allow them to examine half of the requests for
information. (Paragraph 167)

25.	All parts of the oversight system need to do more to improve public confidence in
their work. We recommend that each of the Commissioners and the Investigatory
Powers Tribunal develop an outreach strategy which ought to be published as part of
their annual reports along with details of how they have tried to fulfil the objective of
improving knowledge of their work. (Paragraph 168)

26.	The security and intelligence agencies are staffed by brave men and women who in
many cases risk their lives to protect this country. They deserve our gratitude and
they deserve to be honoured for their work. The best way to honour them is by
ensuring that there are no questions about their integrity and, in order to prove this,
there must be adequate scrutiny of their actions. The current system of oversight
belongs to a pre-internet age, a time when a person’s word was accepted without
question. What is needed is a scrutiny system for the 21st century, to ensure that
sophisticated security and intelligence agencies can get on with the job with the full
confidence of the public. (Paragraph 170)

27.	It is essential that the legal position be resolved clearly and promptly. It is currently
unclear whether CSPs are obliged to store communications data as they were
previously, or indeed if they are allowed to, because of the Data Protection Act. It is
also unclear if the Home Office will continue to pay CSPs for their work on
communications data. (Paragraph 174)

28.	Given the criticism which the Regulation of the Investigatory Powers Act is subject
to, we believe that the legislation is in need of review. We recommend that a Joint
Committee of both Houses of Parliament should be appointed in order to hold an
inquiry with the ability to take evidence on the Act with a view to updating it. This
inquiry would aim to bring the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act up to date
with modern technology, reduce the complexity (and associated difficulty in the use
of) the legislation, strengthen the statistical and transparency requirements and
improve the oversight functions as are set out in the current Act. We recommend
that the inquiry address the areas of concern raised with us concerning
communications data and the oversight of Section 94 of the Telecommunications
Act 1984. (Paragraph 177)

Counter-terrorism 103

Formal Minutes

Wednesday 30 April 2014

Rt Hon Keith Vaz, in the Chair

Nicola Blackwood
James Clappison
Mr Michael Ellis
Paul Flynn

Members present:

Lorraine Fullbrook
Dr Julian Huppert
Mark Reckless
Mr David Winnick

Draft Report (Counter-terrorism), proposed by the Chair, brought up and read.

Ordered, That the draft Report be read a second time, paragraph by paragraph.

Paragraphs 1 to 95 read and agreed to.

Paragraph 96 read, as follows:

The withdrawal of passports is a vital tool in preventing UK citizens from travelling to
foreign conflicts. We understand the need to use the prerogative power to withdraw or
withhold a citizen’s passport. Given that the estimates of foreign fighters are in the low
hundreds, we are surprised that it has only been used 14 times since April 2013 and
recommend that, in all appropriate circumstances where there is evidence, the power is
utilised as an exceptional preventative and temporary measure. However, we note that its
use is not subject to any scrutiny external to the executive. We recommend that the Home
Secretary report quarterly on its use to the House as is currently done with TPIMs and
allow the Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation to review the exercise of the
Royal Prerogative as part of his annual review.

Amendment proposed, in line 8, to leave out from ‘TPIMS’ to the end of the paragraph.—(Lorraine

Fullbrook.)

Question put, that the Amendment be made.

The Committee divided.

Ayes, 3

Mr James Clappison
Michael Ellis
Lorraine Fullbrook

Noes, 5

Nicola Blackwood
Paul Flynn
Dr Julian Huppert
Mark Reckless
David Winnick

Question accordingly negatived.
Paragraph agreed to.

Paragraphs 97 to 140 agreed to.

Paragraph 141 read, as follows:

104 Counter-terrorism

The National Crime Agency was established as a national mechanism as part of the
changing landscape of policing. Like all new organisations, it is still seeking to establish a
strong identity and its own remit. For instance, we remain concerned that the NCA does
not have full operational capacity in Northern Ireland. The Metropolitan Police have a
wide remit which has many complexities and the current difficulties faced by the
organisation lead us to believe that the responsibility for counter-terrorism ought to be
moved to the NCA in order to allow the Met to focus on the basics of policing London. The
work to transfer the command ought to begin immediately with a view to a full transfer of
responsibility for counter-terrorism operations taking place, for example within five years
after the NCA became operational, in 2018. When this takes place, it should finally
complete the jigsaw of the new landscape of policing.

Amendment proposed, in line 4, to leave out from ‘Ireland’ to the end of the paragraph and add:

‘It may be that in due course, the National Crime Agency should take over overall
responsibility for counter-terrorism; however, we believe it would be wise to first see how
this newly formed organisation carries out its responsibilities. Moreover, we endorse the
remarks by David Anderson that a pretty good operational relationship exists between the
police and intelligence. In addition, we also note the remarks of Sir David Omand over the
existing arrangements.’.—(Mr David Winnick)

Question put, that the Amendment be made.

The Committee divided.

Ayes, 2
Paul Flynn
David Winnick

Noes, 5

Nicola Blackwood
Michael Ellis
Lorraine Fullbrook
Dr Julian Huppert
Mark Reckless

Question accordingly negatived.

Paragraph agreed to.

Paragraphs 142 to 157 agreed to.

Paragraph 158 read, as follows:

Furthermore we recommend that the Commons membership of the Intelligence and
Security Committee should be elected like other select committees and that the Chair, who
should always be a member of the Commons, ought to be subject to election of the whole
House, as is the case for Select Committees. We further recommend that the Chair should
always be a member of the largest opposition party.

Amendment proposed, to leave out from the beginning of the paragraph to ‘We’ in line 4.—
(Lorraine Fullbrook,.)

Question put, that the Amendment be made.

The Committee divided.

Ayes, 1

Noes, 7

Counter-terrorism 105

Lorraine Fullbrook	Nicola Blackwood

James Clappison
Michael Ellis
Paul Flynn
Dr Julian Huppert
Mark Reckless
David Winnick

Question accordingly negatived.

Another amendment proposed, in line 4, to leave out ‘We further recommend that the Chair should
always be a member of the largest opposition party’.—(Lorraine Fullbrook.)

Question put, that the Amendment be made.

The Committee divided.

Ayes, 4

Nicola Blackwood
James Clappison
Michael Ellis
Lorraine Fullbrook

Noes, 4
Paul Flynn
Dr Julian Huppert
Mark Reckless
David Winnick

Whereupon the Chair declared himself with the Noes.

Question accordingly negatived.

Another amendment proposed, in line 5, after ‘party’ to insert ‘, and not a former Minister with
responsibility for any of the agencies’.—(Dr Julian Huppert,.)

Question put, that the Amendment be made.

The Committee divided.

Ayes, 4
Paul Flynn
Dr Julian Huppert
Mark Reckless
Mr David Winnick

Noes, 4

Nicola Blackwood
James Clappison
Michael Ellis
Lorraine Fullbrook

Whereupon the Chair declared himself with the Noes.

Question accordingly negatived.

Paragraph agreed to.

Paragraphs 159 to 168 agreed to.

Paragraph 169 read.

Amendment proposed, at the end, to add:

‘While there has been much controversy over the leaked Snowden material in the Guardian
and elsewhere, it is undeniable that the revelations of such widespread surveillance,
including for that matter the hacking of mobile phones of very senior members of

106 Counter-terrorism

governments, including the German Chancellor, has understandably opened a wide and
international public debate, not least in the United States, on whether such extensive
surveillance, and on such a scale, should take place. If anything, media outlets, including
the Guardian, that have responsibly reported on aspects of the material should be
congratulated. We note that the paper received the Pulitzer Prize this year for its reporting
on these issues.’.—(MrDavid Winnick)

Question put, that the Amendment be made.

The Committee divided.

Ayes, 3
Paul Flynn
Dr Julian Huppert
David Winnick

Paragraph agreed to.

Paragraphs 170 to 177 agreed to.

Annexes agreed to.

Resolved, That the Report be the Seventeenth Report of the Committee to the House.

Ordered, That the Chair make the Report to the House.

Ordered, That embargoed copies of the Report be made available, in accordance with the provisions
of Standing Order No. 134.

Noes, 4

Nicola Blackwood
James Clappison
Michael Ellis
Lorraine Fullbrook

[Adjourned till Tuesday 6 May at 2.30 pm

Counter-terrorism 107

Witnesses

The following witnesses gave evidence. Transcripts can be viewed on the Committee's
inquiry page at http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-
select/home-affairs-committee/inquiries/parliament-2010/co-ordinating-the-fight-against-
international-terrorism/?type=2#pnlPublicationFilter

Tuesday 4 June 2013	Page

Cressida Dick, Assistant Commissioner, Metropolitan Police	Ev 1

Cressida Dick, Assistant Commissioner, Metropolitan Police (private)

Tuesday 12 November 2013

Graham Eadie, Head of Customer Service Centre, G4S Care and Justice
Services, Paul Fernley, Customer Support Manager, G4S Monitoring
Technologies Limited, and Kim Challis, CEO, G4S Government and

Outsourcing Solutions (held in private and redacted for publication)	Ev 8

David Anderson QC, Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation	Ev 10

Charles Farr, Director General, Office for Security and Counter-Terrorism,

Home Office	Ev	18

Tuesday 3 December 2013

Alan Rusbridger, Editor, The Guardian	Ev 31

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, Metropolitan Police Commissioner and Cressida

Dick, Assistant Commissioner, Metropolitan Police	Ev	44

Tuesday 14 January 2014

Cerie Bullivant	Ev	55

Nigel Inkster, International Institute for Strategic Studies, former Director of
Operations, Secret Intelligence Service (MI6)	Ev	61

Shiraz Maher, Senior Research Fellow, International Centre for the Study of
Radicalisation, King's College London	Ev	67

Tuesday 28 January 2014

Gilles de Kerchove, EU Counter-Terrorism Co-ordinator, Council of the

European Union	Ev	71

Jean-Paul Laborde, UN Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,	Ev	77

United Nations

108 Counter-terrorism

Tuesday 11 February 2014

Dr Thomas Hegghammer, Director of terrorism research, Norwegian

Defence Research Establishment	Ev 83

Professor Sir David Omand, former Head, GCHQ	Ev 88

Sir Anthony May, Interception of Communications Commissioner, and
Joanna Cavan, Chief Inspector, Interception of Communications

Commissioner's Office	Ev 97

Tuesday 25 February 2014

Richard Barrett CMG OBE, Senior Director for Special Projects, Qatar

International Academy for Security Studies and The Soufan Group	Ev 103

Tuesday 18 March 2014

Rt Hon Sir Mark Waller, Intelligence Services Commissioner	Ev 109

Rt Hon David Davis MP and Nick Pickles, Big Brother Watch	Ev 116

James Brokenshire MP, Minister for Security and Immigration	Ev 121

Counter-terrorism 109

Published written evidence

The following written evidence was received and can be viewed on the Committee's
inquiry web page at http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-
z/commons-select/home-affairs-committee/inquiries/parliament-2010/co-ordinating-the-
fight-against-international-terrorism/

INQ numbers are generated by the evidence processing system and so may not be
complete.

1	CST (INQ0001)

2	Metropolitan Police (INQ0002)

3	Metropolitan Police supplementary (INQ0003)

4	Foreign and Commonwealth Office (INQ0004)

5	Home Office (INQ0005)

6	Home Office Supplementary (INQ0006)

7	Home Office Main submission (INQ0007)

8	Home Office Further supplementary (INQ0008)

9	Home Office Further supplementary (INQ0009)

10	Home Office Further supplementary (INQ0010)

11	Professor Clive Walker (INQ0011)

12	Professor Sir David Omand (INQ0012)

13	Chairman Peter T King (INQ0013)

14	Tom Keatinge (CTE0014)

15	Henry Jackson Society (CTE0015)

16	Financial Conduct Authority (CTE0016)

17	David Anderson Q.C. (CTE0017)

18	David Anderson Q.C. Supplementary (CTE0018)

19	Charity Finance Group (CTE0019)

20	Privacy International (CTE0020)

21	Google, Facebook, Yahoo!, Twitter and Microsoft (CTE0021)

22	Charity Commission (CTE0022)

23	Roger Bennett (CTE0023)

24	Guardian Media Group (CTE0024)

25	Birnberg Peirce & Partners (CTE0025)

26	ARTICLE 19 (CTE0026)

27	Quilliam (CTE0027)

28	Sir Anthony May, Interception of Communications Commissioner (CTE0028)

29	Ministry of Defence (CTE0029)

30	Sir Mark Waller, Intelligence Services Commissioner (CTE0030)

31	Metropolitan Police supplementary (CTE0031)

32	Guardian Media Group supplementary (CTE0032)

33	Claystone Associates (CTE0033)

34	Gilles de Kerchove, EU Counter-Terrorism Coordinator (CTE0034)

35	Paul Laborde, UN Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTE0035)

36	Sir Mark Waller, Intelligence Services Commissioner (CTE0036)

110 Counter-terrorism

37	Sir Mark Waller, Intelligence Services Commissioner supplementary (CTE0037)

38	Susan Cobb, Private Secretary, Intelligence Services Commissioner (CTE0038)

39	Uthman Lateef (CTE0039)

40	Tom Keatinge supplementary (CTE0040)

41	Home Office supplementary (CTE0041)

42	Rt Hon Sir Malcolm Rifkind MP (CTE0042)

Counter-terrorism 111

List of Reports from the Committee
during the current Parliament

All publications from the Committee are available on the Committee's website at

http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/home-affairs-

committee/publications/

Session 2013-14

First Report	Police and Crime Commissioners: Register of Interests	HC 69
Second Report	Child sexual exploitation and the response to localised grooming	HC 68
Third Report	Leadership and standards in the police	HC 67
Fourth Report	The work of the UK Border Agency (Oct-Dec 2012)	HC 486
Fifth Report	E-crime	HC 70
Sixth Report	Police and Crime Commissioners: power to remove Chief Constables	HC 487
Seventh Report	Asylum	HC 71
Eighth Report	The work of the UK Border Agency (Jan-March 2013)	HC 616
Ninth Report	Pre-Lisbon Treaty EU police and criminal justice measures: the UK's opt-in decision	HC 615
Tenth Report	Leadership and Standards in the Police: follow-up	HC 756
Eleventh Report	Khat	HC 869
Twelfth Report	Drugs: new psychoactive substances and prescription drugs	HC 819
Thirteenth Report	The work of the Permanent Secretary	HC 233
Fourteenth Report	The Government's Response to the Committees' Reports on the 2014 block opt-out decision	HC 1177
Fifteenth Report	The work of the Immigration Directorates (April- September 2013)	HC 820
Sixteenth Report	Police and Crime Commissioners: Progress to date	HC 757
Session 2012-13		
First Report	Effectiveness of the Committee in 2010-12	HC 144
Second Report	Work of the Permanent Secretary (April-Dec 2011)	HC 145
Third Report	Pre-appointment Hearing for Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Constabulary	HC 183
Fourth Report	Private Investigators	HC 100
Fifth Report	The work of the UK Border Agency (Dec 2011-Mar 2012)	HC 71
Sixth Report	The work of the Border Force	HC 523
Seventh Report	Olympics Security	HC 531
Eighth Report	The work of the UK Border Agency (April-June 2012)	HC 603
Ninth Report	Drugs: Breaking the Cycle	HC 184-I
Tenth Report	Powers to investigate the Hillsborough disaster: interim	HC 793

112 Counter-terrorism

Report on the Independent Police Complaints Commission

Eleventh Report	Independent Police Complaints Commission	HC 494
Twelfth Report	The draft Anti-social Behaviour Bill: pre-legislative scrutiny	HC 836
Thirteenth Report	Undercover Policing: Interim Report	HC 837
Fourteenth Report	The work of the UK Border Agency (July-Sept 2012)	HC 792
Session 2010-12		
First Report	Immigration Cap	HC 361
Second Report	Policing: Police and Crime Commissioners	HC 511
Third Report	Firearms Control	HC 447
Fourth Report	The work of the UK Border Agency	HC 587
Fifth Report	Police use of Tasers	HC 646
Sixth Report	Police Finances	HC 695
Seventh Report	Student Visas	HC 773
Eighth Report	Forced marriage	HC 880
Ninth Report	The work of the UK Border Agency (November 2010- March 2011)	HC 929
Tenth Report	Implications for the Justice and Home Affairs area of the accession of Turkey to the European Union	HC 789
Eleventh Report	Student Visas - follow up	HC 1445
Twelfth Report	Home Office - Work of the Permanent Secretary	HC 928
Thirteenth Report	Unauthorised tapping into or hacking of mobile communications	HC 907
Fourteenth Report	New Landscape of Policing	HC 939
Fifteenth Report	The work of the UK Border Agency (April-July 2011)	HC 1497
Sixteenth Report	Policing large scale disorder	HC 1456
Seventeenth Report	UK Border Controls	HC 1647
Eighteenth Report	Rules governing enforced removals from the UK	HC 563
Nineteenth Report	Roots of violent radicalisation	HC 1446
Twentieth Report	Extradition	HC 644
Twenty-first Report	Work of the UK Border Agency (August-Dec 2011)	HC 1722

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 1

Oral evidence

Taken before the Home Affairs Committee
on Tuesday 4 June 2013

Members present:
Keith Vaz (Chair)

Nicola Blackwood
Mr James Clappison
Michael Ellis
Lorraine Fullbrook
Steve McCabe

Bridget Phillipson
Mark Reckless
Chris Ruane
Mr David Winnick

Examination of Witness

Witness: Cressida Dick, Assistant Commissioner, Metropolitan Police, gave evidence.

Q1 Chair:	Our witness is the Assistant

Commissioner for the Metropolitan Police, Cressida
Dick. Thank you very much for coming, Assistant
Commissioner. The Committee is due to start a major
inquiry into international terrorism and crime. As a
prelude to the inquiry we have asked you to come
before us today to give us some factual information
concerning the recent events in Woolwich. Many
members of the Committee were present in the House
yesterday when the Prime Minister made a statement
to the House saying that you are responsible for the
operational matters, so that is why you are here. Mr
Speaker also made a statement to the House about
the sub judice rule, which I will repeat today for the
members and others present. Mr Speaker said this: “it
is clear that the public interest means that this is a
matter that Parliament must discuss, and in respect of
which I should indeed exercise my discretion”. I have
already reminded members in private session that they
and I will frame our remarks accordingly.

Assistant Commissioner, the whole country was
deeply shocked by the events that occurred in
Woolwich in the last few weeks. Could I pass on to
you, and I would be grateful if you would pass on to
the police officers and others involved, our thanks and
gratitude for their immense bravery and courage, and
the dedication of those officers in dealing with what
was a very, very serious incident? I would be most
grateful if you would pass that on from the Committee
as a whole.

Cressida Dick: Thank you, Sir. I will.

Q2 Chair: When were you first involved in the
incident?

Cressida Dick: I was informed a matter of a few
minutes later, and I subsequently became the lead for
the Metropolitan Police in relation to the total
response to this incident and indeed, because of my
national role, the national lead.

Q3 Chair: Was it clear right at the start that this was
a possible act of terrorism, as opposed to just a
murder—a barbaric murder, as we have heard? When
did you discover that it was an act of terrorism?
Cressida Dick: It was clearly an act of appalling
murder of a young man. If you would indulge me just

for one second, I want to say that the thoughts of the
whole police service have been and are with Lee’s
family, his loved ones and his colleagues, and we have
been very struck by the dignity and courage that they
have shown since he was killed.

Chair: Of course, and the Committee associates itself
completely with the comments that you have made
concerning the family of Drummer Lee Rigby.
Cressida Dick: Thank you. There were a number of
indications, some of which are probably not
appropriate for me to talk about, at a fairly early stage
that this could be a terrorist incident. As I think you
are aware, the Counter Terrorism Command quickly
took command of the investigation, and we have
treated it as a terrorist incident since that time.

Q4 Chair: Could you give us some factual
information about how many officers have been
involved, how many are still involved, and how many
people have been arrested? We know that two have
been charged, but are there some factual points that
you can give this Committee?

Cressida Dick: I can. At its peak, I believe we had
about 600 officers employed directly on the
investigation. There is another response in our
communities, but 600 directly on the investigation.
This includes nearly 100 from our national counter-
terrorist network. As I think you are aware, we have
arrested a total of 12 people, and two men have been
charged, as you said, and subsequently remanded in
custody. We have searched 17 addresses and six cars.
We have seized 2,649 exhibits as of yesterday. We
have had a fantastic response from the public, and we
have taken statements from 60 members of the public
who are significant witnesses for us. We have also, of
course, gathered in a very large amount of CCTV
from the local area and elsewhere, and we have an
enormous of digital data and forensic material to be
examined.

Q5 Chair: Of the 12 people who have been arrested,
two have been charged. Is it right that eight have been
bailed and two have been released without bail?
Cressida Dick: Yes, that is correct.

Ev 2 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

4 June 2013 Cressida Dick

Q6 Chair: So, the two who have been released
without bail presumably are not people whom you
wish to interview again at the moment. How did they
get caught up in this?

Cressida Dick: They are released; no further action.

Q7 Chair: Regarding the public’s response and the
police response, which we both agree has been
magnificent in providing information, and drawing a
parallel with Boston and what happened there, there
was a media storm about what occurred; there is no
doubt about it. It was obviously something that
everyone in the country, and indeed the world, knew
about. Do you think that the response of the police
was right, in terms of the information that was given,
not just in respect of this particular incident but
incidents of this kind? I am talking about the naming
of suspects. Do you think that should have been done
perhaps sooner, or was it the right time to have
named them?

Cressida Dick: On balance, I think we got our
information out in a timely manner, and effectively.
Our primary consideration is public safety.
Throughout our whole response we have to try to
ensure that the public are kept safe. We also have to
keep people informed, and of course part of keeping
people safe is keeping them informed. We also have
to be very careful not to compromise any future
trial—and as you know the Attorney General has
made some strong comments about that—and our
covert investigations. On the one hand I am very
proud that I do not think there has been any leaking
from our investigation at all, and we have kept the
wider public safe. On the other hand, the
Commissioner was speaking that evening, and we
subsequently had an assistant commissioner the next
day, another assistant commissioner the next day,
other police officers in the interim, and my deputy
talking about the investigation on the Monday. More
importantly perhaps in some ways, we communicate
through our officers on the streets. As you are aware,
we had a huge number of officers engaging through a
variety of different methods—social media, telephone
calls and face to face—with people who might feel
vulnerable and people who needed protection, because
clearly, as well as the investigation, we have to ensure
that people are protected from potential copycats.

Q8 Chair: Are you happy with the way in which the
suspects were named?

Cressida Dick:	I am happy with our police

information-giving. I am sure there may be some
things we could learn from Boston, and indeed our
colleagues from Boston are over with us next week,
and they will want to know what we did. There is
always something we can learn.

Q9 Chair: Indeed. Finally from me, on the issue of
the security services—we do not want to know about
private conversations or private information—is this a
Metropolitan Police investigation, with you at its head
as the head of counter-terrorism, or is it an
investigation that is being jointly conducted with the
security services, or has their role in a sense come to

an end, and this is a fully fledged Met Police
investigation into terrorism as opposed to a murder?
Cressida Dick: This is a police investigation into what
happened on that day, police-led and very strongly
supported by the security services and other agencies,
as you would expect.

Chair: But it is your investigation?

Cressida Dick: It is our investigation.

Q10 Chair: And you will go to other agencies that
might be able to assist you?

Cressida Dick: Absolutely. Clearly we need, and have
needed from the first moment, to ensure that we
identify those responsible for the murder and bring
them to justice, but we also wanted, and want, to
identify anyone else who might seek to commit a
copycat or revenge attack. We have to ensure also that
we have identified whether there was anybody else
involved in the planning or at the scene of the attack.
I can say we have established that at the moment we
have no evidence that there was anybody else present
at the scene of the attack.

Q11 Chair: In terms of lessons to be learned, one of
the key lessons that we are all learning when we read
our newspapers and watch television is the number of
British citizens who may be going abroad to get
involved in activities of an unsavoury nature. They
may go abroad to join terrorist organisations, to
support various causes, be it in Kenya, Somalia, Syria
or Iraq. Do you think that you in the Met, and perhaps
you as head of counter-terrorism, have sufficient
information from our posts abroad about those who
may be up to no good in those countries, who
eventually find their way back into this country? This
may or may not be relevant to this particular case. I
am not asking whether your investigation takes you to
Nairobi in this case, but generally speaking, if we are
learning immediate lessons, how would you be told
that somebody has been, for example, arrested in Iraq
and involved in unsavoury activities and then returned
to this country, if they are a British citizen? Is there
a mechanism?

Cressida Dick: I will talk generally.

Chair: Yes, please.

Cressida Dick: Of course it depends on where, and
what circumstances we are talking about, but the point
you make is that it is extraordinarily important that
we are able to link quite literally the person on the
street anywhere in London with some very far-flung
place, and we do that through our network, a police
network that is national and international, through our
colleagues at the Foreign Office and supported by our
agency colleagues. You have read about Syria. We are
frequently informed about people from the UK who
have travelled to, and appear to be engaged in fighting
in, Syria. I am sure that, as you say, one of the areas
that everybody will want to look at is how we get the
intelligence back, and then what response we make if
we are aware of that sort of thing, but I must stress
that there are a lot of different circumstances here.

Q12 Chair: Of course, but given that this is in the
public domain and we want to learn lessons
immediately, because the person planning the next

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 3

4 June 2013 Cressida Dick

terrorist attack is probably doing it at this moment
somewhere in the country, are you satisfied that if a
British citizen in Iraq has been arrested by the Iraqi
regime for getting involved in paramilitary or military
activity and they are deported back to the UK, the
Metropolitan Police would know about it?

Cressida Dick: If somebody was arrested in the
precise circumstances you have described and was
deported back to the UK, I am confident that the Met
would know about it, but I must say that depending
on the environment one might not know that someone
has even been arrested. It depends entirely on the
circumstances.

Chair: It depends whether that information is with
you. Thank you very much for that.

Q13 Mr Winnick: The Chair mentioned the bravery
of the police officers, which of course we all endorse.
I am sure you would agree about the bravery of the
civilian women on the spot, and one in particular, who
faced the alleged offender. I think the whole country
was full of admiration for what was done.

Cressida Dick: Extraordinary courage was shown
that afternoon.

Q14 Mr Winnick: All organisations would say that
they would like more funding—that is perfectly
clear—but as far as the Metropolitan Police is
concerned, do you feel that there are sufficient
resources, first and foremost obviously financial, to
combat the ongoing threat of terrorism?

Cressida Dick: I think it is important to note that
under this Government, and indeed the last
Government, there has been a very heavy investment
in countering terrorism within policing and of course
beyond. I have previously gone on record to say that
we believe we have a formidable capability, and that
formidable capability, together with our security
service colleagues, has stopped a large number of
lethal, murderous attacks in this country. I feel that
immediately after an incident with the horrible impact
and magnitude of this one is not the time immediately
to say, “We need more resources.” I think we should
look soberly at what needs to change, and then see if
more resources are needed. I am very conscious that
counter-terrorist policing is well resourced.

On the other hand, as I and many other people,
including the Home Secretary, have said, the threat is
very real. The country remains at the threat level of
“substantial”, and we have to deal with a threat that
comes from a very wide range of sources, some of
which are external—the Chair has mentioned some
countries where people might pose a threat to the UK
or UK interests. Sadly, we have a long history of what
you might call home-grown terrorists. An attack is a
strong possibility. We have a big, changing, morphing
threat to deal with, but I am not going to say at this
time that the answer is more resources for the police.

Q15 Mr Winnick: On the profile of the Met, one
of your colleagues said—it received a good deal of
prominence—that much more needs to be done for the
Met to reflect the sort of place that London is now,
not only because it is right, he argued, but because it
is essential in the fight against terrorism. The Met has

the highest number of non-white police personnel. I
believe it is somewhere in the region of just over 10%.
Cressida Dick: Exactly.

Mr Winnick: Would I be right in coming to the
conclusion that the most senior people, including you,
take the position that much more needs to be done to
increase the numbers, and that 10% in a city like
London is unsatisfactory, and certainly
unrepresentative?

Cressida Dick: In relation to countering terrorism, we
broadly reflect the Met, and, as you said, in relation
to black and minority ethnic officers—as opposed to
our other staff, where the percentages are much
higher—we are about 10%. That is well off the level
for London, and although we do have a formidable
capability and some very skilled people doing great
work, I believe that in countering terrorism and in
broader policing we would be even more effective, of
course, if we were more reflective of London. We are
about to launch a recruiting exercise where a very
high priority for us is to increase the representation of
black and minority ethnic colleagues in our service. I
do believe it will help.

Q16 Mr Winnick: One last question—and I am one
of the Members who keep to that “last”—on the
ongoing terrorist threat: do you take the view with
your colleagues that this is going to be a long-term
matter, and that it is not going to be resolved?
Properly, this is connected with international terrorism
generally; it is not unique to Britain. Do you think this
will continue for some years to come?

Cressida Dick: I regret to say that I absolutely do. I
think we are in for a long haul.

Q17 Chair:	On Mr Winnick’s question about

diversity—and of course senior officers have said this
to this Committee over all the years that I have chaired
it—Peter Fahy went further this morning when he said
that if the make-up of the police changed, it would
help the police in dealing with counter-terrorism. He
said that the police are not as effective as they could
be in countering terrorism because of the ethnic make-
up. Do you agree with Peter Fahy that you would be
much better at dealing with these issues if you had
more Muslim and black people in the police force?
He has gone further than others.

Cressida Dick: He is one of my vice-chairs. I speak
to him every other day. We see these issues very
similarly, and I think I have said pretty much the same
thing. I think we have a very effective service, and
some incredibly skilled people—they do great work—
but we would be even more effective if we had more
people with certain language skills and were more
reflective of London’s communities, yes.

Q18 Michael Ellis: Assistant Commissioner, I would
like to join those who have already commended the
exemplary bravery and conduct of everyone at the
scene, including the armed officers who arrived. We
have seen video footage of the situation that they had
to deal with instantly at the scene. Can I ask you about
the response times of the police, and about the
command and control at the local level before the
situation escalated to your level? At this stage, are you

Ev 4 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

4 June 2013 Cressida Dick

happy, from what you have assessed, that local
officers, as well as armed officers, were able to
respond expeditiously in all the circumstances?
Cressida Dick: I am very mindful of the fact that the
Independent Police Complaints Commission are
looking at various aspects of our response at the time,
and I would not want to take anything away from their
investigation, but I must say that I do believe our
response was very, very good. I cannot possibly put
myself in the shoes of the people who were at that
horrific scene—completely traumatised, many of
them, I am sure, by what had happened—waiting for
the police to arrive, but what I can say is that in terms
of both our unarmed response and our armed
response, despite the fact there was some inaccurate
reporting in the media to start with, we were within
our response times that we would expect. Of course
we will see what the IPCC say, but I am very
comfortable with that.

On the basis of what I know, I am also very
comfortable with the command and control. As soon
as the call came in saying that somebody had knives
and a gun, the armed response vehicle was deployed,
and I believe that in the intervening minutes there was
very strong command and control in the way that we
would expect, in the way that we train for.

Q19 Steve McCabe: Commissioner, how do you go
about defining a horrific incident like this as a terrorist
incident? In your judgment, what are the main
ingredients that make it a terrorist incident?

Cressida Dick: As I said, there are some things that it
is difficult for me to say at this stage because matters
are sub judice.

Chair: We understand that. Any of the public reasons
would be fine. We can keep the confidential reasons
to the private session; but publicly, so people can
understand.

Cressida Dick: One of the indicators for us at an early
stage was some of the words that were used at the
scene and captured on social media—the comments
that were made. There are a number of other things
that made us think that we must respond to it as
though it was a terrorist incident, and we are treating
it as a terrorist incident.

Q20 Chair: Is it similar to when there is a racist
attack? It was once defined as somebody who goes
forward and makes racist comments, and therefore
you classified it for the purposes of policing as a
racist attack.

Cressida Dick: Yes, it is very similar. It is not exactly
the same, because if we just had one indicator, like
somebody said, “I think it might be terrorism”, there
are circumstances in which it would be inappropriate
for the whole of the counter-terrorism machinery to
come out. It depends on a number of different
circumstances, but absolutely it is much better to
assume that it is and investigate it thus, with all the
elements that a terrorist investigation would have,
than to decide late in the day that it might have been.

Q21 Chair: Of course it is in the public domain what
the individuals have been charged with, but the 12
arrests that you have made are presumably not under

the normal criminal law. Are you using terrorism
legislation in order to arrest these people, or is it under
the ordinary criminal law?

Cressida Dick: At this stage, everybody who has been
arrested has been arrested under, as you say, the
normal criminal law—under PACE. For example,
some of the people on bail were arrested for
conspiracy to murder using our PACE powers of
arrest. Nobody has been arrested using specific
terrorism legislation powers.

Q22 Chair: Is it a surprise, bearing in mind the fact
that you have described it as, and the public believe it
to be, a terrorist attack, that no terrorism legislation
has been used?

Cressida Dick: It is a very definite decision, and I
believe there are very good reasons for it. I am very
content with the decision, but I could perhaps give
two general points that might inform such a decision.
The first general point is that if somebody is in
hospital, our understanding is that if you arrest them
at that stage under the terrorism legislation, the clock
starts ticking, whereas it does not if you use the Police
and Criminal Evidence Act. Secondly, as I expect the
Committee is aware, under the terrorism legislation,
we do not have any power to bail people.

Q23 Nicola Blackwood: I want to ask you a little
bit about the backlash against the Muslim community.
There was quite a lot of commentary about this in the
immediate days following the incident, and
particularly there were some figures quoted in the
media, I think coming from Tell MAMA particularly,
of 212 instances. More recently, there has been some
coverage that questioned those figures, and that has
said that perhaps up to 46% of those instances were
online and a number of others were to be verified.
What is your assessment of the backlash against the
Muslim community here in the Met area, and do you
have ongoing concerns?

Cressida Dick: To put a little bit of context around it,
my job is not only to ensure that the investigation is
done effectively, but also to ensure that we review the
security posture in London and provide protection to
those who need it. We also have a strategy of engaging
and reassuring, and dealing robustly with hate crime
and disorder, but also of course, where necessary, of
facilitating events and protests. Sadly, in London, as
you know, we have had terrorist attacks before, and
we have seen hate crime—racist crime—increase in
2007, in 2005 and in 2001. We have again seen an
increase in hate crime reported to us and, as you note,
apparently reported to others.

What I would say about that is that every single one
is horrible. Compared with some previous times, I
think we have had slightly less, but I take nothing
away from any of them. I am sure there is some low-
level abuse going on that neither that organisation nor
we are aware of, because people will not always report
it, but what I can say is that the increase has been in
fear and tension, certainly, but not such a very big
increase in attacks as we might have feared. It seems
to have started to reduce. There have been some
horrible attacks on mosques, but as far as I am aware,
we do not have any very serious assaults. If I were to

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 5

4 June 2013 Cressida Dick

summarise that, fear has certainly been up, tension
between communities is certainly up, and it is a big
job for the police to be out there protecting people and
reassuring them. Hate crime was up afterwards. It is
beginning to reduce now, and we hope it will continue
to reduce. Meanwhile, we will robustly investigate
every one that is reported to us.

Q24 Nicola Blackwood: Do you think that the
reporting mechanisms are working effectively? Do
you think that hate crime is being reported enough?
You say that there are instances that you are not aware
of, and that other organisations are not aware of. What
is being done to increase reporting?

Cressida Dick: We have a number of officers whose
whole job is to try to get out into communities, to
encourage people, to help people to understand the
kind of crimes that they should report and the kind of
incidents that they should report. We have a number
of specific mechanisms, through Tell MAMA and
others—what we might call third-party reporting. I do
believe—it is my professional opinion—that we are in
a better position than we were a few years ago, and a
higher proportion of the minority ethnic population
and Muslim population feel that they know how to
report, when to report and that they should report, and
they feel more confident that we will do something
about it, but I am sure that when we debrief the whole
operation there will be other things that we could do
in the future to assist with this.

Q25 Chair: Can you tell the Committee whether any
of the 12 people arrested are going to be the subject
of an application for TPIMs, or are any of them
already subject to an order?

Cressida Dick: I could not possibly tell you that, I am
afraid. That would not be appropriate.

Q26 Bridget Phillipson: You referred to the protests
that have taken place more recently in London. Can
you set out what assessment you have made of how
the Met has responded to that, whether you are
content with that response, and what additional
pressures on resourcing that may have led to? As you
described, you have had to dedicate a lot of officers
to investigating the events that took place in
Woolwich, and presumably some of the protests and
counter-protests have placed an additional demand on
the service.

Cressida Dick: Yes. As I said, on that night and
subsequently we have tried to have extra officers out
and about, ready to respond—for example at the
scenes of arrests and searches—to any incidents, and
constantly talking to people who wish to organise
events, the vast majority of which have been
extremely respectful and easy to support and police,
as well as some other much larger-scale ones. We have
tried to make really good use of our protest liaison
officers in our communication with those event
organisers. Some of them were at relatively short
notice, some of them were quite large-scale, and some
of them had potential to cause real concern in
communities and/or be difficult for us to police. You
will perhaps be aware that we had some big events on
the first Saturday after Lee died, and again this last

weekend. On the last weekend, my colleague Mr
Rowley used powers under section 12 and section 14
of the Public Order Act to move a particular protest
from Woolwich to near here in Whitehall.

Across the country, as well, we have had a whole
range of operations, and indeed protests and events.
Overall, I think they have been policed very well, and
I am very content with the way in which we have
balanced people’s right to protest with our duty to
uphold the law and ensure that, as far as possible, the
peace is kept. It does take a lot of officers and a lot
of experience and skill. It is fair to say the Met has
been going at a fair stretch since the 22nd, and many
officers have worked extensive hours, day after day
after day. What I can tell you is that every single one
of them wants to do that. They all want to be involved.

Q27 Chris Ruane: Coming briefly back to the issue
of diversity, in a previous evidence session we were
informed by two senior black officers that they had
concerns that the diversity of the black and ethnic
community was not reflected currently in police
forces. A charge of £1,000 to enter police college is
now in place, and they felt—I echo their concerns—
that this would work against young recruits from
black and ethnic minorities and also from working-
class council estates. People in those communities do
not have £1,000 up front to put there. When was it
introduced, and what is your assessment of its impact?
Cressida Dick: This is the Police Knowledge
Certificate, which is becoming our prerequisite for
joining the police. I can’t on this case speak for other
forces. What I can say is that we in the Met, from the
moment it first came in, were acutely aware—

Q28 Chris Ruane: Which was when, approximately?
Cressida Dick: It is not my area of responsibility, and
I would have to come back to you with the precise
date; apologies for that. As a management board,
when we were first briefed about this system, we
wanted to try to make it as accessible as possible in
all sorts of different ways, and we were very alert to
the cost. One of the things we are looking at is
whether we should look to have bursaries or to
subsidise people in some way. I know that within
some community organisations where they want to
ensure that people they know—young people that they
are proud of who would be good police officers—
can become police officers, they are thinking about
whether they would support people to go through this.
I think it is fair to say that we are alert to the issue.
We have not resolved precisely how we are going to
deal with it, but we do want to support in a variety of
different ways people who might be put off from
joining the police to join the police.

Q29 Chris Ruane: Are you collecting the data before
and after this charge was introduced to see if it has
had an impact? If you are, could you perhaps relay
that data to the Committee to see which social groups,
and which religious and ethnic groups, have been
adversely or positively affected by this?

Cressida Dick: If I can, I will. My difficulty is that I
am not sure when it was introduced. I am absolutely
sure we will be monitoring. I do not know how many

Ev 6 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

4 June 2013 Cressida Dick

people have come through that system nationally and
what data are available, but of course I shall look for
the data. Bear in mind, of course, that many forces
have not been recruiting.

Q30 Chair: Can we clear up a couple of points
before we go into private session? First of all, it is
in the public domain that the Metropolitan Police is
providing some kind of protection to Anjem
Choudary. Is that correct?

Cressida Dick: We constantly risk-assess what is
going on around a number of different people who are
very high-profile in the media. In the case of
somebody like Mr Choudary, we are constantly
assessing, of course, whether any of his proclamations
are breaking the criminal law.

Chair: That was my next question.

Cressida Dick: We are working with the CPS to
ensure that if he is breaking the criminal law, we deal
with it very swiftly. I am not going to comment on
what precisely we are doing with Mr Choudary. All I
would say is that if we did fear that someone, anyone,
whoever they may be, as a general point, had their life
at risk, or indeed that there is going to be some sort
of major disorder around them, we may put in place
a variety of kinds of police presence to stop an assault.

Q31 Chair: It is reported that you are providing
support. I understand why you do not want to tell the
Committee in open session about it, but you are giving
us a general point that in those circumstances, even
though you may be considering prosecuting him, he
may be someone whom you would risk-assess. Is that
right? You can leave it as vague as that if you want to.
Cressida Dick: If there is ever information in the
public domain that somebody might be assaulted, or
their life may be at risk, we will always look at that
and see if they are aware that this is the case. There
are a variety of different things we can do, but if
somebody’s life is at risk, we do have a duty, whoever
they may be, to ensure that they are not killed.

Q32 Chair: What worries some of us in the
Committee is a report we produced last year into the
roots of radicalism, in which we looked at the whole
issue of proscription. He in particular has been
involved with a number of groups—Islam4UK, al-
Muhajiroun, the Call to Submission, Islamic Path, the
London School of Sharia, the Saved Sect—and of
course the organisations have been banned, but that
does not stop individuals from being involved in other
activities that are possibly inflammatory. Do you think
that we need to look at the issue of proscription again
and review the way in which we proscribe
organisations? Suddenly, individuals and
organisations pop up somewhere else with different
names.

Cressida Dick: This is clearly a very difficult issue
for legislators to deal with, and if it was easy, I am
sure it would have been solved some time ago. It does
cause a great deal of concern and frustration to us that
precisely what you have described happens: people
can move from group to group. A group can be
proscribed, and then the name can be changed and it
can be very difficult to prove any offences. I know

that in the Prime Minister’s announcement it is clear
that this sort of thing—what more legislation can do—
is going to be looked at, and I certainly welcome that.

Q33 Chair: One of the areas is of course the internet.
For example, this afternoon you can still go on the
internet and see Anwar al-Awlaki give one of his
speeches. Are you working with the internet service
providers and the search engines like Google to try to
get them to be more proactive, to try to stop such
extremist material being put on the internet?

Cressida Dick: Yes. We have a unit called the Internet
Referral Unit that is housed within the Metropolitan
Police but has a national responsibility. They seek out
and are informed about such material, and they work
with providers to get that material taken down. As the
internet changes, they are becoming more and more
skilled at this. We are having very high volumes of
extremist material taken off the internet. We are also
trying to ensure that where it cannot be, for whatever
reason, it does not find its way into what you might
call the public estate—into libraries and that sort of
thing. This is a developing field, quite clearly.

Q34 Chair: I am sure you are aware of what they are
doing at Europol, which is monitoring all the websites
throughout the whole of Europe. Presumably they are
keeping you informed when they find a website that
is particularly nasty.

Cressida Dick: Yes, and we do have some very good
technology of our own as well.

Q35 Nicola Blackwood: There is quite a lot of
debate about the role that the Communications Data
Bill might play in situations such as the Woolwich
murder. In your opinion, would the Communications
Data Bill have been helpful in this instance or going
forward in your work?

Cressida Dick: I do not think I can speculate as to the
use of communications data to date in any
investigation that has gone before. No doubt part of
the Intelligence and	Security	Committee’s

deliberations will be to see what has happened. What
I can say is that every single significant counter-
terrorism investigation	depends	hugely on

communications data, almost every murder
investigation, going forward, depends hugely on
communications data, and as each day goes by we are
finding and fearing that our capability is beginning to
degrade. I have put this on record before. It is clearly
a matter for others to decide what is appropriate
legislation, where the balance lies between what we
need and say we want to do our work as effectively
as we can and people’s privacy. For us this is an
incredibly important tool, and we use it all the time in
counter-terrorism.

Q36 Steve McCabe: In these cost-conscious times,
is there any limit to how much money you will spend
on protecting individuals who invite trouble by their
own behaviour and who, by their own statements,
have nothing but contempt for the British state and
the British police, and are therefore not very likely to
co-operate with you?

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 7

4 June 2013 Cressida Dick

Cressida Dick: There is certainly a limit on the
amount of protection we can give to anybody.
Certainly when we are looking at what the intelligence
is, what the issue is, what the risk is, and what should
be done, one of our considerations very often is to
talk to the individuals themselves about how they can
protect themselves and how they can reduce their risk
of harm, so costs do come into our decisions,
absolutely.

Q37 Chair: At the moment, in respect of this inquiry,
you have not had to go to the private sector to get any
additional support, as you have done in some of the
other Metropolitan Police investigations. This is all
members of the Met, or those from other police forces.
Is that right?

Cressida Dick: Yes, it is.

Q38 Chair: Just remind the Committee how many
people you have working on this currently.

Cressida Dick: A couple of days ago we had 600. I
think it has come down slightly from that. I can
furnish the Committee with the latest number shortly
after the meeting.

Chair: Assistant Commissioner, thank you very much
for coming to give evidence today. We are most
grateful. We are now going to go into private session
with you, and we will clear the gallery of members of
the public.

Ev 8 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

Tuesday 12 November 2013

Members present:

Keith Vaz (Chair)

Ian Austin	Dr Julian Huppert

Mr James Clappison	Yasmin Qureshi

Michael Ellis	Mr David Winnick

Examination of Witnesses

Witnesses: Graham Eadie, Head of Customer Service Centre, G4S Care and Justice Services, Paul Fernley,
Customer Support Manager, G4S Monitoring Technologies Limited, Kim Challis, CEO, G4S Government and
Outsourcing Solutions, gave evidence in private.

Chair: This is an informal session, but what you say
will be part of our evidence. If there is anything
confidential that someone wearing a tag could use,
please feel free not to tell us, or when you see the
transcript, redact it. You can be open and transparent,
but if there is anything you do not want the world to
know about—subject to certain limits—we are happy
for it not to be made public. Would you like to tell us
what you do for G4S? Ms Challis?

Kim Challis: I am the CEO for government and
outsourcing. I report to Eddie Aston, who is the new
regional CEO. I took on my post on 1 October last
year. I am accountable for the Government portfolio
that G4S has today.

Paul Fernley: I am a customer support manager,
reporting into our monitoring technologies division in
Leicester, which I believe you visited recently. My
remit covers testing and approval of all the monitoring
equipment; acting as an expert witness in court when
the equipment is challenged or a breach occurs
involving the equipment; educating and training
stakeholders and people who use the electronic
monitoring service; and managing our fleet of
equipment.

Graham Eadie: I am the head of the customer service
centre. I am the account manager for the TPIMs
contract and also responsible for all the other high-
profile subjects that we monitor at G4S.

Q53 Chair: Would you like to sit down?

We just want to know about the practicalities. It is not
the Government relations angle we are after here; it is
how the technology works. Who is able to tell us how
a tag works?

Paul Fernley: I can do that. To refer back to your
opening comment, a lot of what I say probably would
not be something we would want people wearing tags
to know the details of. Clearly there is a security
aspect to some of that.

Chair: You will have to speak up a little. I know it’s
secret, but you don’t have to stand. You can sit down;
you just have to speak a little louder. The doors are
very thick, so no one outside can hear.

Paul Fernley: Okay. So this is our GPS tracking
device, which is used in the TPIMs contract. It is a
multi-function device, which is attached to the
subject’s ankle in such a way that it cannot be
removed without detection and without leaving behind
evidence that can then be interrogated to show what
has occurred to cause the damage. It uses several

different technologies in providing monitoring. First,
it uses a GPS tracking system in much the same way
as any satellite navigation system would, it accesses
the satellite and positional data via GPS. [xxx]. It can
also transmit any alerts and alarms in that way, so that
if anyone interferes with it or cuts the strap, it can
transmit an alarm immediately [xxx] to our systems
to warn us of that.

[xxx].

It also has radio frequency, RF, capability, so if you
want to monitor a subject within a home or a set
location, you can install a monitoring unit in the
property. The device also transmits radio frequency
signals, which are received, as long as it is within the
area you want it to be, by the monitoring unit. That
provides an extra level of monitoring within a
building.

In terms of tamper detection systems and capabilities,
this uses proven technology which we have had in
place in our equipment for many years now and which
has proved to be extremely reliable and robust. [xxx].
We connect that to the opposite side and fix the strap
to the ankle, [xxx]. Within two seconds, the device
knows that somewhat has interfered with the integrity
of the fixing.

Q54 Chair: How many people have G4S tags?

Paul Fernley: Of that type?

Q55 Chair: Just the TPIMs device.

Paul Fernley: Well, TPIMs is a separate, quite small
contract1.

Q56 Chair: The device, not the contract.

Paul Fernley: In total we have between 80 and 100
in the UK at the moment with that device.

Q57 Chair: That’s it? Just 100?

Paul Fernley: Yes, but more worldwide.

Q58 Chair: This is the top-level model?

Paul Fernley: Yes, is the GPS multi-function device.

Q59 Chair: [xxx].

Paul Fernley: [xxx].

Q60 Michael Ellis: The fact of the matter is, though,
that you do not set out to make these indestructible.

1 Note by witness: It is not a separate contract, TPIM cases
are managed as part of the wider MOJ contract.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 9

12 November 2013 Graham Eadie, Paul Fernley and Kim Challis

The issue is not whether the defendant or the suspect
can get them off. The issue is: can it be detected if he
or she does? [xxx].

Paul Fernley: I would really like to address that
point, because it is very important. Obviously the
design and manufacture of these devices are subject
to very stringent conditions, laid down by the Home
Office and the Ministry of Justice. We do not set the
parameters for how we design them. They issue an
extremely detailed and comprehensive specification
for all electronic monitoring equipment, which the
devices have to be tested to. In terms of strength, it is
stringently laid down that the strap has to break [xxx].

Q61 Chair: [xxx].

Paul Fernley: [xxx].

Q62 Michael Ellis: Mr Fernley, isn’t the point,
though, that for safety reasons it is supposed to be
able to be broken off in an emergency situation?

Paul Fernley: Absolutely, yes.

Q63 Michael Ellis: Presumably, you could make
these much tougher, so that nobody could cut them
off, but you deliberately don’t.

Paul Fernley: We could, but if we did make them
tougher, they would not meet the specification to
which we have to conform. That specification would
need to be altered. If it were, then yes, we could
definitely make it harder to remove. You have to bear
in mind situations like emergencies at hospitals: if
someone wearing a tag is rushed into hospital and
needs a CT scan or an operation, they have to be able
to remove the tag, [xxx]. That is another reason why
they have to be removable.

Q64 Mr Winnick: You told the Chair that about 100
people are wearing these at the moment?

Paul Fernley: Of this GPS one, yes.

Q65 Mr Winnick: Of that 100, nine would be
subject to a terrorist order.

Paul Fernley: Eight or nine, yes.

Q66 Mr Winnick: And the rest? What categories
would they be in?

Kim Challis:	We supply mainly the offender

management units within police forces. They may use
them for volunteers for whom the police have found
tagging an appropriate method of monitoring. For the
police forces that make use of that kit—it varies, but
we have between 60 and 80 devices—we only provide
the equipment. We do not do any of the monitoring.
We literally provide the equipment and they do the
installation and the monitoring.

Q67 Ian Austin: Can you tell us on how many
occasions these have been tampered with?

Kim Challis: [xxx].

Q68 Ian Austin: Is this across the 100 people or the
10?

Kim Challis: No, we are not aware of tampers outside
the TPIMs contract, because we are not responsible
for monitoring.

Q69 Ian Austin: [xxx].

Kim Challis: [xxx].

Q70 Michael Ellis: [xxx].

Paul Fernley: [xxx].

Q71 Michael Ellis: [xxx].

Paul Fernley: [xxx].

Q72 Ian Austin: [xxx].

Paul Fernley: [xxx].

Q73 Chair: That is very helpful. As far as
Mohammed Ahmed Mohammed is concerned, we
have just received a letter from Eddie Aston, your
regional CEO. [xxx].

Hon. Members: [xxx]..

Q74 Chair: [xxx].

Paul Fernley: [xxx].

Q75 Chair: [xxx].

Graham Eadie: [xxx].

Q76 Michael Ellis: [xxx].

Paul Fernley: [xxx].

Q77 Chair: Who makes these tags apart from G4S?
Presumably you are not the only company in the
world that makes them.

Kim Challis: No. [xxx].

Q78 Chair: Very delicately put. There are no more
market leaders in the UK, or is this worldwide?

Kim Challis: Worldwide.

Q79 Chair: But your involvement in this case ended
by the time you told them that the tag had been
tampered with.

Graham Eadie: That is not strictly true.

Q80 Chair: [xxx].

Graham Eadie: [xxx].

Q81 Chair: It is your property, but they are the
client.

Graham Eadie: Yes. The protocol is that we do the
reporting and the police take the enforcement action.

Q82 Chair: Do you know if it was cut in that case?
Graham Eadie: We know we got the tamper alert.

Q83 Chair: But you do not know what happened.
Paul Fernley: We know that the integrity of the strap
was breached [xxx].

Chair: Excellent. Thank you so much for coming
today. It has been very helpful.

Ev 10 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

Examination of Witness

Witness: David Anderson QC, Independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, gave evidence.

Q84 Chair: I welcome David Anderson QC, the
independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, to the
Committee. I refer everyone present to the Register of
Members’ Interests where the interests of members of
this Committee are noted. I remind everyone that this
is our inquiry into counter-terrorism, which is
ongoing. Mr Anderson, thank you for coming. I think
on previous occasions we had you down and then had
to stand you down at short notice, but we are very
grateful for your patience and kindness in coming in
today.

Obviously, the situation regarding Mohammed Ahmed
Mohammed has come into the public domain since we
asked you to come in here. We do not want this to
dominate the session, but there are questions we
would like to ask you about it because, clearly, it will
reflect on our view of the operations of the TPIMs and
control orders and other issues of structure. You are
the independent reviewer, and you have done a report
into BX, who is, of course, Ibrahim Magag. Does it
concern you that, for those watching from outside, we
seem to have lost our touch as far as monitoring
counter-terrorism issues are concerned? Here are these
people just disappearing without people knowing
where they are. Is there a real fundamental problem
with the way in which we administer the counter-
terrorism policy?

David Anderson: It obviously is a concern that, of 10
people who have been subject to TPIMs, two have
absconded—in fact, two have absconded in the past
year. They are not, of course, the first to abscond:
there were others who absconded before mid-2007
who were under control orders. In the intervening
period, we managed five and a half years without any
absconds at all. Of course, any abscond is a concern,
but I think it is important to appreciate what it is that
TPIMs can do and what they cannot. What they are
not is a foolproof way of keeping the population safe
from terrorists. The only foolproof way that I know
of doing that is to lock everybody whom the Home
Secretary believes might be dangerous in a high
security prison and leave them there for the rest of
their lives. Thankfully, that is not the sort of country
we live in.

The other thing that they are not is a measure that can
last indefinitely. We would all very much like to see
people who are believed to be dangerous safely out of
harm’s way for a very long time, but that just is not
feasible in circumstances where they have not been
convicted of any criminal offence, and in
circumstances where, although the courts do have to
look to see whether the Home Secretary’s belief is a
reasonable one, they do not have to be persuaded,
even on a balance of probabilities, that that person has
been a terrorist. We are stuck with this perhaps
slightly unhappy compromise. Of its nature, it is not
a measure that is entirely secure, but on the other
hand, they have been very useful in disrupting
terrorism and in preventing terrorism activity taking
place.

Q85 Chair: Yes. You are telling this Committee that
they are not as good as control orders because of the
powers that control orders have?

David Anderson: I am not going to say good or bad,
but I think they are significantly different from
control orders.

Q86 Chair: But they are not as effective as control
orders?

David Anderson: There are some differences between
control orders and TPIMs that I think have had an
impact on the effectiveness of the measure. The main
one is the question of relocation. During that period,
June 2007 to December 2012, when there were no
absconds, quite a high proportion of those controlled
persons were—horrible phrase—relocated away from
the towns where they lived to other towns, usually
two or three hours apart. Of course, that is not
foolproof. One can escape from Norwich or
Gloucester or Ipswich just as one can escape from
London, but the thought is that it might be easier to
escape in a city where you have associates who might
be able to give you some help.

Q87 Chair:	Had this particular individual,

Mohammed Ahmed Mohammed, come to your
attention before? Obviously, there are court papers
indicating he was part of a group called the London
Boys, which is associated with al-Shabaab. You said
in your report of 2011, “The allegations against some
TPIM subjects are at the highest end of seriousness
even by the standards of international terrorism.”
These are not choir boys, are they?

David Anderson: No, certainly not. Because there are
not very many of them, I follow all these cases quite
closely both by attending meetings where their cases
are discussed and, of course, by reading the judgments
in the cases.

Chair: You have come across Mohammed Ahmed
Mohammed before?

David Anderson: I have not met him but, of course, I
knew about his case.

Q88 Chair: Is he a dangerous person? Is he a worry,
as people now think he is?

David Anderson: He has been heavily engaged not
only in fighting but in attack planning in Somalia—or
so the Home Secretary believes; no criminal court, of
course, has ever shown that. He has also been
involved in recruiting other English people to travel
to Somalia. You may have seen from the open
judgment of last October, the review of his TPIM
measure, that he was associated in some way with
Ibrahim Magag, the other abscondee, or at least he
was thought to have been associated.

Q89 Chair: Yes. That is the person you had
completed your report on in March 2013. You did
some kind of review?

David Anderson: Not a specific review, no. The
Home Secretary indicated to Parliament that she
would keep me briefed on the progress of the
investigation into Magag’s abscond. She was as good

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 11

12 November 2013 David Anderson QC

as her word and so I am aware of what happened after
that abscond, yes.

Q90 Chair: What is worrying is that here you have
these orders that Parliament passes, and people still
abscond. In his case, of course, there is no passport.
Is it not standard practice, since you are following
these people on TPIMs, that somebody ought to know
where their passport is?

David Anderson: That certainly is standard practice,
which is not to say anybody necessarily fell down on
the job on this occasion. I think there are probably
aspects of this I cannot go into.

Q91 Chair: No, but the passport is pretty important
because if someone needs to travel they need their
passport, don’t they?

David Anderson: Yes. For some of these people on
TPIMs, the inability to travel abroad is what you are
aiming for. That is probably the most important of all
the restrictions.

Q92 Chair: The other worrying aspect is that the
mosque itself said that they were not aware that this
particular gentleman was on a TPIM. I think that the
head of the mosque, the imam, Khalid Rashad, said
that if only they had known they would have
cooperated with the authorities. They seemed to have
no idea that the person coming to worship at their
mosque was the subject of a TPIM. As you are
reviewing terrorism legislation, do you not agree that
the involvement and the engagement of community
groups is absolutely vital in the fight against
terrorism? As we are constantly told, despite having a
budget of £1.9 billion, the security services cannot
follow everyone all the time. They need the support
of the public. Does it concern you that the mosque did
not even know?

David Anderson: I would agree entirely that the
support of communities is the single most important
factor in the fight against terrorism. That is so whether
you are talking about England or Northern Ireland. In
relation to whether TPIM subjects should be publicly
known, the view is normally taken that their identities
are not disclosed for their own protection. It is very
different in the case of asset freezing where, of course,
it can be an offence to pay money, for example, to
somebody who is under an asset freeze; therefore,
their identities are released and their associates and
people whom they meet and people who employ them,
indeed, will know that they are subject to an asset
freeze.

Q93 Chair: We will put this to Charles Farr, but the
Home Secretary is supposed to be drawing up a list
of those mosques that are radical mosques and
presumably not allowing those with TPIMs to go and
worship at those mosques. You would have no
problem with that?

David Anderson: She certainly has the power to do
that under the law as it is drafted. She can make an
exclusion order in relation to any of these people. That
might exclude them from going to an area where
known harmful associates are living. It could, in

principle, prevent them from going to a particular
mosque or mosques.

Q94 Mr Winnick: Of course, in the Second World
War a number of people, obvious suspects, were held
without detention under the 18B regulations, which I
am sure you are aware of—Mosley and his thugs. In
the circumstances, there did not seem to be any
alternative since we were engaged in a world war
against tyranny. As far as these people are concerned,
who may well be as dangerous as it is said and I have
no reason to doubt otherwise, would it not be better
resolved, speaking perhaps as a lawyer—you, not
me—by seeing if legislation could be amended so that
such people can be tried, rather than use a system that
is, apart from the Second World War, somewhat alien
to the whole concept of British justice?

David Anderson: I completely agree that the best
solution in every case, if it can be done, is to put these
people on trial. Can I make a similar comment about
criminal justice to the comment that I made about the
TPIM? Sadly, it is not a guarantee of everybody’s
complete safety. If we have become so risk averse as
a society that we demand a guarantee that everyone at
all times be safe from terrorism, then the criminal
process as it currently exists is not going to provide
that guarantee. I think we still operate on the principle
of Blackstone, that it is better for 10 guilty men to
walk free than it is for one innocent man to be
punished. You will remember that, of the 10 people
who have been subject to TPIMs since the system
came in, four have been placed on trial and have been
acquitted by a jury. Nonetheless, the Secretary of State
believes they are dangerous terrorists and the courts
have supported her in that belief when the reviews
have come before them.

Like you, I am troubled by the fact that there are cases
that cannot be prosecuted at all. I think there was a
perception in some quarters that this was all because
we did not allow telephone intercepts as evidence,
whereas most other countries, of course, do. That is
something into which there have, I think, been eight
separate inquiries since 1993, with none concluding,
“Yes, it would be easy to do. Let us do it”. Certainly,
my predecessor, Lord Carlile, who was a
distinguished prosecutor at the Bar, looked at all 52
control order cases and concluded that admitting
intercept in those cases would not have made any
difference. I have quizzed the Crown Prosecution
Service similarly about the TPIM cases and they tell
me the same thing. What the problem seems to be,
rather, is not wanting to put into open court either
foreign intelligence or technical surveillance product
or evidence from a human agent, for obvious reasons:
one would be giving away secrets to the person who
is on trial or to his associates or to the public.

Q95 Ian Austin: There are three areas I would like
to ask about in relation to TPIMs, firstly in relation to
their introduction. As I understand it and as you have
said, under the old control orders and TPIMs the
difference is that relocation powers are able to be used
under control orders and, during the five years that
they were in place, no suspects escaped. Last week
the Prime Minister told the House of Commons that

Ev 12 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

12 November 2013 David Anderson QC

the TPIMs were introduced to replace control orders.
They had to do so because of the courts, but when
they were introduced the Home Secretary said that
control orders had been excessive and unnecessary.
She said that the new regime would “restore our civil
liberties”. Is it reasonable to assume that, with the
introduction of TPIMs or the replacement of control
orders with TPIMs, there was a deliberate choice to
put the civil liberties of terror suspects ahead of the
risks to the public?

David Anderson: I do not think it is as simple as that,
first of all because the added freedoms that go along
with a TPIM might give you added investigative
opportunities. I think the thought was that if people
were freer perhaps to associate with people that they
had known in a place with which they were familiar,
it might be possible to pick up a little more
information on what they are doing and perhaps even
reach the Holy Grail of being able to prosecute them
for terrorism-related activity. I think that was part of
the thinking.

Another part of the thinking and the reason why it is
not just a simple trade-off between liberty for the
suspect and safety for the rest of us is that
considerable additional money was devoted to the
police and to MI5 for the purposes of surveillance. It
was not ring-fenced for a very specific purpose, but
the clear understanding was that this money was being
paid in order to compensate for the fact that relocation
was being ended and, of course, TPIMs were coming
to an end after two years, whereas control orders could
be rolled over year on year. It is that that led the police
and the security service to the assessment that the
change would mean no substantial increase in overall
risk.

Q96 Ian Austin: They arrived at that judgment
because they were told, as you said, that there would
be extra resources provided for the implementation of
the new orders. Your predecessor, Lord Carlile, said
the cost would go from £1.8 million a person per year
on a control order to £18 million per TPIM. That is
what he said, is it not?

David Anderson: There is a footnote by that figure to
the effect that it may not have been quite right, but I
think, in any event, if that comparison was made it
was a comparison of two rather crude figures. The
second figure, I assume, would have been intended to
represent the entire cost of keeping somebody under
24-hour surveillance for a whole year. Without
spilling any secrets, I question whether that is a very
realistic way of looking at the way surveillance is
practised in this country. It tends to be much more
selective than that.

Q97 Ian Austin: Is there any evidence that any
additional information has been obtained by the police
or the security services as a result of the additional
freedoms that the suspects have been granted?

David Anderson: I don’t think TPIMs have been very
successful as investigative measures, any more than
control orders were; although that is not to say that a
complete blank has been drawn in relation to the
gathering of evidence of possible utility for a criminal

trial. I would certainly accept that we have not seen
the fruits of that at this stage.

Q98 Ian Austin: On the question of surveillance, you
said the figures of £1.8 million and £18 million were
crude and you could not compare them and all that,
but what extra funds have been provided and what
extra surveillance has been implemented? If it has
been appropriate, how it is possible that Magag could
just call a cab and this guy Mohammed could just
change his clothes and both of them escape?

David Anderson: I wish I could give you the figures.
Unfortunately, I am not able to give you the figures.
It may be that if you press Charles Farr, who of course
has the authority to give them, he may be more helpful
to you, but it is a substantial sum.

Q99 Ian Austin: What can you tell us about the
information that was provided to Ministers about the
differing levels of surveillance that would be applied
under the old regime and under the current regime?
David Anderson: I don’t think I can tell you what
Ministers were told about levels of surveillance. What
I can say is that surveillance is adapted constantly to
the individual you are dealing with, to the perceived
level of risk and to other factors as well. One might
have regard to where he is, what his family are doing
or what his associates are doing. It is a constantly
varying thing and, ultimately, it is the security service
that would have the responsibility for deciding the
extent of surveillance that might be placed on any
particular individual at any particular time.

Q100 Ian Austin: You have said yourself that these
people are at the highest end of seriousness, and you
have talked about the sorts of things they have been
involved in. At the moment there are all sorts of
resources being devoted to tracing Mohammed, but in
January he would just be free to come and go—at the
end of January, the TPIM would be lifted, along with
all the rest of them, and they would all be able to
come and go. People who have been involved in all
sorts of plots to bring down airliners and all sorts of
different things would be able to come and go as they
please. Surely this has to be reviewed. This sunset
clause, it appears to me, presents real dangers.

David Anderson: Obviously there are dangers in
releasing on to the streets people who are believed by
the Home Secretary, supported by the courts, to be
dangerous terrorists. I do think, though, you have to
put this in context. Before 2005 there was no power
on the statute book to subject British citizens to any
kind of constraint in these circumstances unless they
were in the criminal process: if they had been arrested,
if they had been charged, if they had been convicted
of a criminal offence. This is all new since 2005. If
you compare it with other countries as well, you will
find some countries with vaguely similar provisions,
in particular Australia where they have had the system
and used it only twice for relatively short periods. We
are certainly at the top end of that.

If I may just say two other things about the two-year
period. It perhaps brings advantages as well. First, on
a point already made, it concentrates minds on the
need to find a criminal solution and it stops you just

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 13

12 November 2013 David Anderson QC

parking these people in a shadow justice system,
where nobody has to prove anything but they can
remain under constraint. The second thing it does—
and thank you for your tolerance, Chairman—is it
helps you focus on exit strategy. What are we going
to do with these people at the end of the two years?
How are we going to prepare for the end of the two
years? Instead of just sitting in a warehouse and being
quietly forgotten, minds are focused on what is a
sensible disposal.

Q101 Michael Ellis: I did think I was question 2, but
that does not seem to have happened, Chairman. Mr
Anderson, bear with me while I ask you several
questions now. First of all, there is clearly a political
agenda in some quarters to try to make a point about
control orders and TPIMs, “Ours is better than yours.
Yours is better than mine”. Let us get to the crux of
this. Is it not the case that under the duration of the
control orders something in the region of seven people
absconded? Could you say yes or no, please, rather
than nodding?

David Anderson:	That is true. Seven people

absconded before 2007.

Q102 Michael Ellis: Before 2007. We have two
absconds now under TPIMs. Is that right?

David Anderson: Yes.

Q103 Michael Ellis: The other thing I wanted to ask
you was this. Is it not the case that under the currency
of control orders, before TPIMs came into force, the
courts were starting to delve into the control orders
and starting to weaken them, starting to effectively
question their validity and, in effect, reduce their
potency?

David Anderson: I do not agree with that. I would
say that the courts certainly refined the operation of
control orders.

Q104 Michael Ellis: What do you mean by
“refined”?

David Anderson: For example, they brought down the
maximum allowable curfew to 14 hours. There is
nothing more—

Q105 Michael Ellis: Forgive me, Mr Anderson, but
isn’t that weakening something? If the maximum
curfew was more than 14 hours and then the court
reduces it to a maximum of 14 hours, that is
weakening the power of that order, isn’t it?

David Anderson: Yes, but that judgment did not
require a new maximum of “overnight” or 10 hours
to be imposed, which is what has happened now. Yes,
the courts did have an impact on the operation of
control orders, but there was no suggestion in the
courts that the system of control orders was unlawful.
One might say, and I will give you this, that the courts
did not have to deal with people who had been under
these sorts of constraints for six or seven years, as
some people now have. It may be that, had one arrived
at that point, the courts would have started saying,
“Hang on, this is not just a temporary disruptive
measure. This looks very like house imprisonment and

it has just been going on for too long”, but we did not
get to that stage.

Q106 Michael Ellis: We did not quite get to that
because they did not last long enough, but there were
signs in judgments, were there not, that the judges
would be concerned at this point, as you rightly say,
several years having passed, that effectively there was
a violation of the human rights we keep hearing about
of these suspects?

David Anderson: Some of the liberalisations, which
incidentally I welcome to the terrorism laws over the
last three years, have been prompted by judgments of
the courts, even the Court of Human Rights—the end
of stop and search, for example, in the street. I would
not put TPIMs in that category, because the principle
of control orders had been upheld by the courts, even
if specific aspects or specific orders were said from
time to time to be excessive.

Q107 Michael Ellis: I am struck by what you said
when you started your remarks, which was that there
is no failsafe mechanism of protecting the public from
terrorist attack short of locking people up in a
maximum security prison, and I suppose even in those
circumstances people have been known to escape.
While we are in a situation where we cannot lock
people up without sufficient evidence and we cannot
deport them either if they happen to be British citizens
or if deporting them means that they will be killed in
another country, there is very little we can do, other
than that which we are already doing, to restrict their
liberty as much as is possible without a conviction or
evidence. Was that a fair characterisation?

David Anderson: I think there are an awful lot of
weapons in the armoury. In my view, control orders
were and TPIMs are an important weapon. Nobody
likes them very much, but they are very useful. One
concern I have about all this is this zero risk mentality.
If every time something goes wrong with one person
on one of these orders and a political storm or a media
storm ensues, it seems to me the likely consequence
is going to be that people become very averse to using
these remedies at all. What we may find is that, for
essentially political reasons, we lose what could have
been a very effective remedy.

Q108 Michael Ellis: When you were asked about
this two-year strategy, I think you were saying that
you think there ought to be a mechanism whereby,
when people come to the end of their two-year orders
under TPIMs, they are helped out of them. Is that what
you are saying? Is that your view?

David Anderson: My view is a very pragmatic one.
In the criminal courts I sit as a criminal recorder. I
can have someone before me convicted of stealing the
wheels off a car and even that person has a probation
officer prepare a report on him and tell me what he
thinks the best disposal is to make sure he does not
offend again. My concern was that people were
languishing for years on control orders. The police
officer, the spy and the civil servant would meet every
now and again to see how he was getting on, but no
one was necessarily thinking about the best way of

Ev 14 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

12 November 2013 David Anderson QC

ensuring that at the end of the order he was guided
towards a more productive life.

Q109 Michael Ellis: So the easiest thing to do was
just continue him on that order, whereas now that
cannot happen?

David Anderson: I think there is an incentive now to
think seriously about this, which is why I have
recommended that the law be changed in order to give
the Home Secretary a power to require these people
to meet with appointed persons. It might be a
respected imam or an elder in the community. In some
cases it might be utterly pointless, but in other cases—
some of these people were very young; one was in his
teens when he first went on a control order—it might
be helpful.

Chair: I seem to have lost a little bit of control, like
the TPIMs, on this session because a lot of questions
have been asked. We do have another witness, just so
you are all aware of that, but that is not a warning to
Mr Winnick who may ask as many questions as he
wants, following Yasmin Qureshi.

Mr Winnick: I am just setting the example, perhaps,
for the other two.

Q110 Yasmin Qureshi: I am not going to be talking
about the merit of TPIMs over control orders. What I
am more concerned about is the balance between
security and civil liberties. I think you know—I am
aware of the fact—that there have been a number of
cases where people have been arrested, sometimes
they have spent a lot of time in custody, they go to
court, and the cases are dismissed. You have talked
about some cases specifically in the TPIM regime and
others—four put on trial, four acquitted. Would you
think that we have gone perhaps too much on to
security and thereby eroded the civil liberties?

Chair: Mr Anderson, that is an essay for you.

David Anderson: Yes.

Yasmin Qureshi: Yes, it may be. Sorry, I do not
mean to—

David Anderson: Let me start very broadly.

Chair: But could you be brief?

David Anderson: I am rather proud to live in a society
where, on the whole, people can go about their daily
business neither terrified that they are going to be
killed by terrorists nor irritated beyond belief by the
measures that are put in place to protect us. In terms
of conviction rates, they are pretty good. On people
charged with terrorism offences, the CPS do a pretty
good job—I have forgotten the exact percentage. It is
in my report, but a substantial proportion are
convicted.

I would accept that that is not the case where people
are put on trial for breaching their TPIMs, and I think
one reason for that is the breaches are often very
trivial. You might be a couple of minutes late phoning
your service provider to tell them you have arrived
back home and that will be logged under the zero
tolerance policy. You may eventually end up, if the
CPS allows it, in court. I think it is sometimes difficult
to persuade juries, who do not of course see the
national security case against these people, that these
are serious offences that do deserve to be convicted.

Q111 Yasmin Qureshi: Yes, you are right. Where
people are being prosecuted and charged, I do not
think anybody has any real issue about those because
that is what should be happening. The concern that a
number of people have is about where somebody has
not been charged, and they are not going to be
charged; they are just there because the Home
Secretary feel that there may be something—
whatever. Then there are all these other forms of
evidence that can be used, and we are told that
sometimes they will not prosecute a case because they
cannot get certain evidence in. From my former
practice, I know the fact that the courts have various
different means of getting evidence in without people
knowing who their source is—you do not have to
reveal the source of your informant; you can give
evidence behind screens; you can do all sorts of
things.

David Anderson: I think there is more potential for
that and I am certainly not trying to do a compare and
contrast, but under control orders where, in principle,
the detention or the constraints could be indefinite
then perhaps there was more of a risk of that
happening. It is difficult to see why it would happen
with TPIMs because they are a weaker measure. They
can only last for two years. It is not a terrific win for
the police or the security service to get someone put
under a TPIM for two years because it is very
expensive to look after them and they are free at the
end of the two years. I think, for them, the first option
is always going to be to prosecute and so it should be.

Q112 Mr Winnick: Mr Anderson, under schedule 7
of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill,
as we know, people can be detained without any
suspicion whatsoever. It is meant, presumably, to
ascertain whether they could be involved in terrorism,
as I understand the position. You are rather critical of
that, aren’t you?

David Anderson: I think it is a very useful power that
has been instrumental in securing evidence that has
been used to convict terrorists and that has been
particularly useful in gathering intelligence on
terrorist activity, including not least from the search
of data, for example, on mobile phones that are seized
as people go through the port. I would not say I was
critical, but I think the fact that, as you say, it can
be used without the need for any suspicion—anyone
travelling through a port can be subject to a schedule
7 examination—means that there is a potential for
over-use. I have been very pleased to see that this
power was used 30% less last year than it was three
years ago. Unlike the old stop and search power,
section 44, which almost ballooned out of control, this
one seems to be used decreasingly as the years go by.
Having said that, there are still 60,000 people or so
stopped at ports; not all those stops are based on
intelligence and I think there is room for a further
decline in those numbers and for some further
safeguards on how the power is exercised.

Q113 Mr Winnick: There is one particular case that
I have consulted today. It remains sub judice, so
obviously I have no intention of mentioning it but,
insofar as you would like to see some change, I

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 15

12 November 2013 David Anderson QC

assume it is on the basis that there should be some
possibility that terrorism has been involved before the
person is detained and questioned. Is that so?

David Anderson: I have been persuaded that we still
need a no-suspicion power to stop and examine. Take
the example of two men going through Heathrow: the
intelligence services know all about one of them and
he is a hardened terrorist; the other person they have
never seen before. They know nothing about him
except that he is travelling with somebody dangerous.
That is not reasonable suspicion, but wouldn’t you
want to get him in and ask him some questions? I
would suggest that that is plain common sense and
that you would.

Where I have more concerns is where you look at
some of the ancillary powers, for example the power
to detain someone for up to nine hours—if the Bill
goes through, it will be six hours—the power to
download a mobile phone, the power to take DNA
and so on. It seems to me it is worth at least thinking,
as indeed the Joint Committee on Human Rights has
thought, about whether some further threshold might
be necessary at that stage to justify the exercise of
those powers. I do not necessarily say it has to be as
high as reasonable suspicion, but I think it does bear
thinking about and debating as to whether some
further safeguard is not necessary at that stage.

Q114 Mr Winnick: The Government knows your
views, presumably, on this?

David Anderson: Yes. I publish my reviews in
reports. The last one came out in July and I indicated
there where I thought it was a good idea to do some
thinking. Of course, there is an avalanche of litigation
going on, so in a sense this is not the ideal time to be
looking at a Bill. As well as the case you mentioned,
there was another case decided last week, a case
decided back in August, the Supreme Court passed
comment on schedule 7 a couple of weeks ago, and
there is a case pending in Strasbourg. There is an
absolute blizzard of legal cases at the moment and we
will have to see how the landscape looks when they
have all been decided.

Q115 Mr Winnick: Do you believe The Guardian
was wrong to publish material arising from Edward
Snowden?

David Anderson: I am certainly not going to get into
that. I think we would all agree that the media are not
above the law. They are subject to the law as
everybody else is.

Q116 Mr Winnick: We know from the current court
cases that the newspapers are not above the law. There
is a case going on.

David Anderson: I am not going to talk about that
one, but I think we know anyway that the media are
not above the law. Of course, if you look at the
prosecutorial guidelines and so on, newspapers are not
like everybody else. To the extent that they can
demonstrate a public interest in what they are doing,
that may affect the public interest test that the
prosecutors apply.

Q117 Mr Winnick: Mr Anderson, I certainly do not
want to push you against your will. You have been
very forthcoming in your views and we appreciate
that, but if I can just ask you, arising from what I have
asked you about The Guardian, do you nevertheless
feel that the debate that is taking place—various
people have said that we need to have a review of
existing powers; that the amount of intelligence-
gathering shown by what Snowden has revealed is
such that it is too extensive. We know, for example,
arising from all this—an issue highly beneficial to
terrorism—that the German Chancellor’s phone was
hacked. Do you think in all these controversies arising
from what The Guardian has published that it has
been useful to have such a public debate both in
Parliament and outside?

David Anderson: I think the debate has undoubtedly
been useful. It is not for me to say whether the utility
of that debate has been outweighed by the damage
that is said to have been done to national security by
some of the specific disclosures. I do not get into that;
it is not something I am capable to judge, but certainly
one can make the case that the Regulation of
Investigatory Powers Act, although only 12 years old,
has already been overtaken by developments in
technology and I could well understand the argument
for revisiting some of the powers in that Act.

Q118 Mr Winnick: I wonder if I can just pick you
up on what you said, “the damage to national
security”. Are you basing those remarks on any
evidence? You may not wish to share with the
Committee. I accept that, but there does not seem to
be anyone producing evidence that the Guardian has
produced material that will aid and benefit terrorism.
It is very well for others, not necessarily yourself, to
say that they are undermining security and the rest of
it, but no evidence seems to be produced of any kind.
What is being produced is a sort of wide-ranging
review. I heard, for example, the US Secretary of State
saying in reply to a question—he was being
interviewed on Radio 4 today—that the President is
carrying out a full review. That is unlikely to have
taken place without the Snowden revelations.

David Anderson: That is the question of the public
interest benefit. As far as the detriment is concerned,
no. My job is to look at the operation of the Terrorism
Act. I am not the Surveillance Commissioner or the
Intelligence and Security Committee, and I have not
asked for the detailed evidential briefing, which is
what I would need if I were going to be persuaded
that very serious damage had been done to national
security. I can understand, and it might even be
thought to be self-evident, that if documents are
published or indeed given to hostile people that
indicate that a particular form of communication has
been decrypted, then terrorists or others might be
alerted to the advisability of not using that channel of
communication and moving on to something else
where coverage might be less good. I can understand
the theory. I cannot pretend to have looked at the
evidence.

Mr Winnick: Thank you very much. I will not press
you any further.

Ev 16 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

12 November 2013 David Anderson QC

Q119 Chair: Are you a Guardian reader?

David Anderson: It is one of the papers I read—not
the only one.

Mr Winnick: It is not yet a criminal offence, even to
the Tory Government.

Q120 Chair: I should tell you that the editor will be
coming to give evidence to the Committee in
December. You saw the evidence of the three security
chiefs to the Intelligence and Security Committee?
David Anderson: I did, yes.

Q121 Chair: Do you think that terrorists were
rubbing their hands with glee when they saw the
articles in the Guardian?

David Anderson: They have, no doubt, listened to the
tapes and I have not. I can only defer to them on that.

Q122 Dr Huppert: I am not sure in what order to do
things. If we can rewind slightly to schedule 7, which
we were on for a while, there are some changes being
made to the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and
Policing Bill, and while that legislation is in the House
of Lords there is the opportunity to implement
anything you recommend. Will you have a series of
recommendations in time and have you had any
communication from the Government that they will
implement the changes that you recommend?

David Anderson: It is always difficult for me to know
how to do this because I report on the operation of the
Act. I see my role as being to inform the public and
political debate, rather than to participate in it, but I
would say there are perhaps four issues that would
bear looking at, at least. The first we have already
touched on: the test that must be satisfied before some
of these ancillary powers are used—for example the
power to download, the power to detain or to keep
people beyond a certain time. I do not say it needs to
be as high as reasonable suspicion, but should
something be required.

The second issue relates to the use made of answers
given under compulsion. This is a point that the
divisional court brought up in the case of Beghal that
was decided a few weeks ago. It seemed
unconscionable to them that answers given under
compulsion should ever be used in a criminal court.
Although I think most people who operate the system
work on that assumption anyway, the judges
suggested that the Bill should be amended to make
that point.

The third issue relates to the treatment of privileged
material, journalistic material and so on. I am going
to say no more about that because that one is sub
judice and Miranda and we will have to wait and see
what the current position is.

Fourthly, and this is perhaps not for the statute but
nevertheless very important, is the question of what
you do with all this data that you harvest from
somebody’s mobile phone or their computer. If it is
DNA, of course we have the protection of the
Freedoms Act 2012—all sorts of protections are in
place to make sure it is kept for as long as it is needed
but not any longer—but nothing equivalent when it
comes to electronic data. That is an issue, of course,

that goes well beyond schedule 7, but it seems to me
it is still an important one.

Q123 Dr Huppert: This is a very helpful list and it
fits fairly well with a motion passed at the latest
Liberal Democrat conference—a list that you possibly
have seen but it goes with this—but you did not quite
answer the question about whether you have had
communication with the Government about whether
they would implement the changes that you are
suggesting. Will you have the opportunity to get
things done the way you would like them to happen?
David Anderson: I have not sought to present them
with a Christmas list. I do talk quite regularly to the
Government and to police about the way the power
operates and how it might be improved.

Q124 Dr Huppert: I think you would find some
people interested to hear what you recommend. Can I
just move on to cover a couple of other things that we
do need to cover? One is about the location of
counter-terror policing. You made some comments
recently almost that it should not be discussed until
we have seen how the NCA works. Is that still your
position and when should we be debating it and when
should we be asking you back to comment?

David Anderson: I saw Sir David Omand’s evidence
to your Committee, which demands the highest
respect, and he suggested there should be a five-year
moratorium before anybody even discusses the idea. I
do not know whether I would go as far as that, but I
do very much echo his call for caution. We have a
system that, although not ideal, does at least work
pretty well and it has one priceless benefit that one
does not see to the same extent in a lot of other
countries, which is a pretty good operational
relationship between police and intelligence.

At the other end you have another benefit. You saw,
for example, the investigation of the murder of
Mohammed Saleem in Birmingham earlier this year.
That was a terrorism investigation but what you saw
there was specialist terrorist police working very well
with local police. By the end it was a question of
knocking on doors and say, “Have you seen this
man?” Again, the fact that the unit was embedded in
the local community and was part of a local force, I
think, had some usefulness.

Q125 Dr Huppert: I am sorry to jump around so
much. We were talking earlier about the public debate
and I think you welcomed the public debate that is
now happening about intelligence and security,
oversight and what is and is not reasonable. The
debate in the UK has been far more muted than in
many other countries—US, Germany, Brazil and
many other places. Why do you think that is and what
would change that? What would create a more
informed and broader public debate?

David Anderson: I would suggest we are very proud
of our intelligence services. If you wanted my top two
reasons, I would say Bletchley Park and 007. We have
not had the sort of bad experience that they had in
parts of Germany or in Eastern Europe with
intelligence services and, for that reason, I think

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 17

12 November 2013 David Anderson QC

people are disinclined to believe that those who have
those responsibilities are misusing them.

Q126 Chair: But James Bond used to shop at
Harrods, and sometimes it looks as if we are going
into Aldi these days, with people escaping all the time.
Doesn’t it worry you that the great reputation of our
security services and the police are damaged by these
stories of people just getting into cabs or going into
mosques and changing into a burqa and then
escaping? This is a worry for what is the best security
service in the world, is it not?

David Anderson: In this job, Chairman, as in yours,
worrying things happen every day of the week. There
are huge jailbreaks in Iraq and Afghanistan with
terrorists of—

Q127 Chair: Yes, but we are talking about only 10
people and you have your eye on these 10 people.
One would assume that everyone else had their eye
on them. If you look at Mohammed Ahmed
Mohammed’s sister, she said, “When he was on a
TPIM it was not as strict as being on a control order.
Then he was being followed all the time, but with a
TPIM it was just the first few months. It was like that
and then it became more laid back. Before it was
every day.” It is the policy that seems to be wrong,
not the operation.

David Anderson: I do not want to get into a political
debate, particularly a party political debate, on
whether control orders were better than TPIMs. I do
not think that is my function. My function is to—

Q128 Chair: I am not asking you to do that. I am
asking you for the operational aspects of this.

David Anderson: I think, looking at it operationally,
what one must not lose sight of is that both control
orders and TPIMs resemble nothing so much as bail
conditions. In fact, if you look at, for example, the
bail conditions that Abu Qatada was under when he
was on immigration bail, they were a lot stricter than
anything that was permissible under a TPIM.
Unfortunately, people do sometimes jump bail. It is a
fact of life.

Q129 Chair: Are our expectations too high? Would
we expect then people who are on a TPIM with a G4S
tag to regularly tamper with their tag and disappear?
David Anderson: No, Chairman ...

Q130 Chair: In which case, what is the point of
having them?

David Anderson: ... of course not, but I think if one
does have an expectation of zero risk then one is not
only bound to be disappointed, but one also risks
misallocating resources in pursuit of 100% protection
that is never going to be attainable.

Q131 Chair: Would it help if we had exit checks at
airports? One of the issues, in this is about the
passport and the fact that Mr Mohammed was brought
back to the UK. If we had exit checks, presumably we
would know who was leaving the country.

David Anderson: One advantage of the schedule 7
port power is that of course that can be used on exit

as well as on entry. If one has information that a
person is going to be leaving the country through a
particular port at a particular time, or even if one just
thinks they might be, it is possible to put some sort of
check in place. Of course, it would not be difficult to
think of ways in which life could be made safer but a
lot of them would be very intrusive. Somewhere, the
balance has to be struck.

Q132 Chair: It would help if people were prosecuted
if they tampered with their tags, because that is a
criminal offence and it appears that those who have
tampered with their tags so far have not been
prosecuted. The Home Secretary is very keen on
prosecuting them.

David Anderson: Yes, she is very keen.

Q133 Chair: Why haven’t they been prosecuted?
David Anderson: I do not want to give away any
secrets from within OSCT but any suggestion that the
Home Secretary was anything less than wholly
dedicated to tracking these people down would be
completely misplaced.

Q134 Chair: But why is she not being listened to by
those who have operational responsibility?

David Anderson: I think she is.

Q135 Chair: Why is she saying, “I want them
prosecuted and nobody is prosecuting those who
tamper with their tags”?

David Anderson: But you give an example of
prosecution for tag tampering. Ironically, the very day
he absconded, the Crown Court, I think, at Southwark
had just heard from the Crown Prosecution Service
that they could not proceed with the prosecutions for
tag tampering. There was a very strong wish to do it,
but at the door of the court, for whatever reason, the
evidence did not stack up, so the prosecution had to
be pulled. Ironic, you might think, that it is the same
day that the tag is disposed of and the suspect flees.

Q136 Chair: This is the allegation that there is
something faulty with the tags and, therefore, they say
that they have been tampered with but in fact they
have not been tampered with? Is that the issue?

David Anderson: The other thing about these cases is
they may seem trivial but they are remarkably difficult
to prosecute and a lot of evidence is required, expert
evidence. There are experts who specialise in tags and
how easy they are to tamper with and how the tamper
might have taken place.

Chair: Yes.

David Anderson: It was in that context, I think, that
those charges were dropped.

Chair: Unknown to you, we did have private
evidence from G4S about the tags, though we should
have had them after you had gone because I think this
session has raised even more questions that we would
like to ask.

Q137 Ian Austin: You said that under the TPIMs
there was this process that enabled people to be
weaned off the TPIM and prepared for life without
these controls. Given that the TPIM on Mohammed

Ev 18 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

12 November 2013 David Anderson QC

would have ended at the end of January and he has
fled now, that process has clearly not been very
successful, has it? What confidence can we have in
the idea that it will work in relation to the other people
on TPIMs?

David Anderson: There are some in respect of whom
it probably would not even be worth trying; people
who are believed to be ardent terrorists.

Q138 Ian Austin: But surely then, controls should
be maintained and the sunset clause should not apply.
David Anderson: I suppose it comes down to what
sort of country we want to live in. Do we want to live
in a country where we have a little more assurance as

to our safety but where people are kept indefinitely
under harsh constraints, without having been
convicted of a criminal offence? Some people will
take one view and some the other.

Chair: Mr Austin, we will put that question to
Charles Farr, who might be better able to answer it.
Thank you very much for coming in, Mr Anderson.
You have been very helpful. We will write to you
again following this session because our inquiry will
continue until March. If there is anything that you
would like us to know about, please do not hesitate to
write to us.

David Anderson: Thank you very much indeed.
Chair: Thank you for coming in.

Examination of Witness

Witness: Charles Farr, Director General, Office for
evidence.

Q139 Chair: Mr Farr, welcome to the Committee.
This is not your first appearance, though on previous
occasions you were here in a different capacity. We
are pleased to see you here in open session. As you
know, the Committee is undertaking an inquiry into
counter-terrorism and we have asked a number of
witnesses to come in to talk about the architecture of
counter-terrorism. I would like to ask you about the
most recent issue concerning Mohammed Ahmed
Mohammed. We have heard evidence from David
Anderson on this and, of course, many of us were in
the Chamber on 4 November when the Home
Secretary gave her statement to the House.

I want to start by asking you about the passport issue.

I specifically asked the Home Secretary whether the
police had the passport of Mr Mohammed because,
very similar to Ibrahim Magag, there was a delay in
telling Parliament exactly what the situation was. It
turned out that she said to the House and to me, in
good faith—no one is challenging the Home
Secretary’s good faith—that the passport was with the
police. She then wrote to me to say that in fact she
had been briefed incorrectly. You obviously head the
Office of Security and Counter-Terrorism and you
would have seen the brief before it arrived with the
Home Secretary. How is it possible that such a
mistake could be made, where the Home Secretary
was given incorrect information?

Charles Farr: Thank you. On the question of the
passport, when a TPIM is issued it is standard practice
for the subject of the TPIM to have his passport
withdrawn and it is surrendered to the police and held
by the police. In this particular case, an assumption
was incorrectly made that that had happened in the
case of Mr Mohammed. The draft of the Home
Secretary’s speaking notes was shared with the police
to check the accuracy of it. The police corrected this
point, but the correction was not acted on swiftly
enough in my office. It is entirely our responsibility.
For that reason, the Home Secretary said something
that was wrong, and I apologise for that. I have
apologised to her and I believe she, of course has
written to you.

Security and Counter-Terrorism, Home Office, gave

Q140 Chair: Yes. You feel that this is because of
information you received from the police?

Charles Farr: No, the police corrected our
information.

Chair: After she appeared in the House?

Charles Farr: No, before. I am not being clear. We
gave our draft briefing to the police and the police
pointed out to us that they did not have Mr
Mohammed’s passport—they do have the other
passports of other TPIM subjects—but by the time
that correction reached us, the brief had gone on its
way and it was not corrected for the Home Secretary
in time. I emphasise that the responsibility for this is
ours, not the police’s.

Q141 Chair: Thank you for that apology. As far as
the other TPIM subjects are concerned, presumably
we now know where their passports are?

Charles Farr: We have double-checked and they are
indeed all with the police.

Chair: All the other TPIM subjects’ passports are
with the police?

Charles Farr: Yes.

Chair: Mr Mohammed does not have a British
passport. Is that right?

Q142 Charles Farr: Mr Mohammed was entitled to
a British passport, but when he was deported from
Somaliland, where, as you know, he was detained by
the authorities, he had no British passport and it was
not found with him.

Q143 Chair: Right. But how is it possible, for those
of us who obviously also scrutinise immigration
issues, for someone to be deported from a foreign
country without a travelling document? We do not
seem to be able to send anyone out of this country
without a travel document.

Charles Farr: He was issued with a British travel
document by the embassy in Ethiopia. That is standard
practice where someone is stateless and they are being
removed from another country to here. When he
arrived in the UK he was searched. That travel
document was taken from him. No other travel

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 19

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

document was found on him and, in particular, no
British passport.

Q144 Chair: Mr Farr, knowing what Mr Mohammed
was involved in, knowing his association with al-
Shabaab, why would our embassy go out of its way
to give a British travel document to someone to come
back into this country to involve themselves in
activities that would end up with them being put under
a TPIM? He did not have a British passport so we
gave him a document to travel, to bring him back so
that he could carry on his activities. It does sound a
bit odd, does it not?

Charles Farr: He was entitled to a British passport
and he had a British passport that was issued to him
in 2005. We were under an obligation in those
circumstances, when requested by the authorities in
Somaliland, to arrange for his removal back to this
country, which was what they had requested.

Q145 Chair: What is his status now then?

Charles Farr: He remains the holder of a British
passport or at least entitled to a British passport,
which he does not have in his possession.

Chair: But he has not applied for one?

Charles Farr: No.

Q146 Chair: In the time that he came back, when we
helped him come back with a British travel document,
which you say we are obliged to do—I can tell I you
I have so many cases of people we are trying to get
rid of out of this country but we can’t because the host
country will not have them back—I have not come
across this obligation to return to our country
somebody we do not want to have here. Presumably,
with his history, we would not want to have him, as
in the case of al-Libi, the last person who sought
asylum to whom we did not give asylum. Why is it
that we keep bringing all these people back?

Charles Farr: I think the fundamental distinction
between Mr al-Libi, who as you know was not in fact
granted asylum, and Mr Mohammed is that Mr
Mohammed had been granted UK citizenship in 1999.
He had acquired a British passport in 2005 and it was
for that reason that there was felt to be an obligation,
which I understand to be a legal obligation, to
facilitate his removal from Somaliland when it was
requested by the Somaliland authorities that that
should happen. When he came back here, as far as I
know—this is what the records say—he did not apply
for another British passport and has not acquired
another British passport. Whether he has another
passport at present, we do not know.

Q147 Chair: Just a second, Mr Winnick. I will bring
you in in a second. I am just following this thread,
which sounds bizarre to me, that we should go out of
our way to bring someone back like this. The Home
Secretary is now talking about stripping British
passport holders of citizenship, which she has some
powers to do already. We can’t strip Mr Mohammed
of his citizenship because he does not have his
citizenship, although he is entitled to it. In all the time
he has been here, he has never applied for a British
passport, although you are telling us he is entitled to

do so. If she decides that she does not want him to
stay, where does she send him to?

Charles Farr: I think it is important to make a
distinction, if I may, between a passport and
citizenship. As you rightly say, the Home Secretary
has the right to deprive a UK national, a UK citizen,
of their British passport. The terms on which she is
able to so were amended slightly and confirmed in a
written statement earlier this year. The Home
Secretary has a separate power, not under prerogative
but under primary legislation, to deprive someone of
their nationality only so long as they have another
nationality and are not thereby left stateless. There are
some legal uncertainties around aspects of that, but
these are two separate processes. In the context of Mr
Mohammed, his travel document was removed from
him when he came back here. He did not apply for
another passport, but he was not deprived of UK
nationality.

Q148 Chair: No, we understand that. As far as other
people are concerned, if they have another citizenship
you can get rid of them, but if they do not have a dual
citizenship we are stuck with them as stateless people.
This is the problem with these issues.

Charles Farr: Broadly you are correct. It is not
possible for us to deprive someone of their British
nationality if they are thereby left stateless. There is
some uncertainty, which we are currently looking at,
about whether that applies to people who have been
naturalised here as well as to citizens who are born
here, but I hesitate to comment on that any further
because it is an issue that is with the lawyers.

Q149 Chair: Of course. It is just that we have seen
a pattern with the Kenyan case of Michael Adebolajo.
A British official goes to court and argues that he
should be returned to the UK. Mr Mohammed returns
to the UK. Are we doing something with these
people? Are they of use to us in some way by bringing
them back to our country?

Charles Farr: They are of no use to us, no, and I
think the only—

Chair: Because it is odd that we should be going out
of our way to bring everyone back.

Charles Farr: Only where they are UK nationals. I
would emphasise that, where people are not UK
nationals, that obviously does not apply and where
they are dual nationals it is and has been open to the
Home Secretary to deprive someone of UK
citizenship, so long as they are not rendered stateless,
and thereby to keep them out of this country. I think
you will not be surprised to know that the Home
Secretary would do the utmost and expect us to do the
utmost to keep people out of this country who are
engaged in terrorist-related activity where they have
no overriding legal reason to remain.

Q150 Chair: My final question on passports: he is a
Somalian citizen as well as a British citizen?

Charles Farr: I am not aware that he is a Somali
citizen, no.

Chair: He has no other citizenship?

Charles Farr: So far as I know, but let me double
check that.

Ev 20 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

Chair: You mean you do not know this?

Charles Farr: As far as I know he—

Chair: The Home Secretary has made a statement to
the House—

Charles Farr: As far as I know he is a mono-UK
citizen.

Q151 Michael Ellis: Mr Farr, can I move on from
that point and ask you about this in respect of
Mohammed Ahmed Mohammed, the legal system,
what he was doing and how he was operating within
the legal system? Was he being prosecuted for
breaking his control order at the time of his
absconsion and can you tell us something about what
was happening as far as his processes through the
courts are concerned, because I am concerned about
that?

Charles Farr: Yes. Not untypically for people on
TPIMs or previously on control orders, this is quite a
complicated case; so please bear with me and stop me
if I am going into too much detail. Mr Mohammed
came back here, as we have discussed, in March 2011
and was placed on a control order. In October 2011
he was arrested on 14 counts of breaching that control
order. I note in passing that that control order included
a relocation.

Q152 Michael Ellis: Sorry, is that in the public
domain?

Charles Farr: I have seen references to it.

Q153 Michael Ellis: He was being prosecuted for 14
breaches of his control order?

Charles Farr: He was arrested and remanded in
custody in October 2011, pending prosecution for 14
breaches of his control order, and those breaches had
taken place between August and October. However,
he subsequently argued, in February 2012, that his
trial for those breaches should be stayed behind a
review of his control order, which he had been seeking
through the court. That was agreed and, although the
CPS requested that he remain in custody, that was
refused and he was let out.

Q154 Michael Ellis: A judge bailed him?

Charles Farr: Correct.

Q155 Michael Ellis: Do we have this right so far?
He is being prosecuted for breaching his control order
on 14 separate occasions.

Charles Farr: Arrested and charged.

Q156 Michael Ellis: Arrested and charged, but the
prosecution against him is stayed because he is
arguing that the control order was not lawful in the
first place?

Charles Farr: That is correct.

Michael Ellis: Originally he was remanded in
custody, but then he was released on bail—

Charles Farr: That is correct.

Michael Ellis:—and clearly he was on bail under
these conditions when he put the burka on and
escaped?

Charles Farr: It gets a little bit more complicated. In
December 2012 he was arrested a second time, in this

particular case for breaches of what had then become
his TPIM. He was arrested on six counts and again
remanded in custody and again, in April 2013, the
court granted him bail after he again argued for his
trial on the breaches to be stayed behind, on this
occasion, an appeal against a High Court judgment
that had reaffirmed the validity of his control order
and TPIM. In effect, he did the same thing again,
though in this case he was asking for his breach
prosecutions to be stayed behind an appeal rather than
the original High Court judgment.

Q157 Michael Ellis: This is extraordinary. Despite
14 allegations of a breach of a control order and six
allegations of a breach of TPIMs, he keeps being
readmitted to bail from custody by the courts until he
goes on to escape by putting this burka on?

Charles Farr: Forgive me. There is one more
relevant episode.

Michael Ellis: I dread to think.

Charles Farr: In July 2013 he was arrested again, this
is the third time, and he was again, for the third time,
remanded in custody. Once again, in a very similar
way, in August 2013 he argued that that prosecution
should be stayed behind his appeal against the High
Court judgment upholding his control order and his
TPIM. The CPS, as they had on the two previous
occasions, opposed the granting of bail. The court
granted it. He was released in August 2013.

Q158 Michael Ellis: The crux of this, it seems to
me, is that he was successful, or his legal team was
successful in repeatedly asking the courts to stay
proceedings against him because if he had been
successfully prosecuted for breaching these orders he
would have been given a custodial sentence for the
breaching of the orders, would he not? Have there
been examples of people being sent to prison for
breaching these orders?

Charles Farr: Yes, there has been one example of
someone convicted for breaching a TPIM and there
were two previous examples of persons being
imprisoned for breaching control orders.

Q159 Michael Ellis: How long was the sentence?
Charles Farr: The TPIM breach earned a sentence of
nine months and the accumulated counts earning that
sentence were less than those that had been
accumulated in this case. It is reasonable to assume
that, if convicted, he would have earned a sentence of
well over a year or probably 18 months.

Q160 Michael Ellis: With your leave, Mr Chairman.
If they had not stayed the cases of all these breaches
and he had been prosecuted and convicted, he would
not have been on bail at all. He would have been,
almost certainly, serving a sentence of more than a
year in prison?

Charles Farr: That is correct.

Q161 Michael Ellis: He played the legal system?
Charles Farr: I can’t comment on that.

Michael Ellis: No. I can.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 21

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

Q162 Mr Winnick: Leaving aside the legal system,
it is quite a saga, is it not, over this individual and,
apart from threats to our security, the cost to the public
purse? Mr Farr, I want to bring you back to the
question the Chair put to you and your response. I am
not altogether clear in my own mind why he was
allowed back, given his history. You said that there
was some ambiguity. You are not sure on what legal
aspect he was allowed back into Britain. Is that so?
Charles Farr: He is a UK national and a mono-UK
national. As such, if another country, in this case
Somaliland, is unable to prosecute him and they
determined that they were so unable and wished to
deport him back to his country of origin, we had a
legal obligation to facilitate that.

Mr Winnick: Not a UK citizen; a UK national.
Charles Farr: He is a UK citizen. It is the same thing.

Q163 Mr Winnick: You are saying in effect,
regardless of the evidence that was against him for all
his various activities, that there was absolutely no way
in which he could be refused and then a court case
could emerge in which the British Government would
put the evidence why he should not be allowed back.
Is that what you are saying?

Charles Farr: Once the authorities in Somaliland had
determined that there was no evidence that they could
admit in court sufficient to prosecute and convict and
therefore, as we would in similar circumstances, that
they wished to deport, we were obliged to facilitate
that deportation, which we did through a British
travel document.

Q164 Mr Winnick: How did he become a UK
national in the first place; Mr Farr?

Charles Farr: Mr Mohammed arrived here in 1989 at
the age of three and he was granted nationality in 1999
at the age of 13. I am happy to look into the
circumstances of that. I do not have it to hand, but—

Q165 Chair: If you could do two things for us it
would be extremely helpful. You have been very open
with us today, Mr Farr. If you could let us have a
timeline on the breaches of the orders together with
the prosecutions or the attempted prosecutions and
also if you could look at the issue of when he acquired
citizenship, because it is relevant to our inquiry and
further questions we have about foreign fighters that
we shall put to you. We are very concerned that we
are going out of our way, it seems, to have people
back here and then try to get rid of them again. What
you are saying to us is that we can’t get rid of him
anyway. Unless he is a Somali citizen—

Charles Farr: Correct.

Chair:—he is here to stay and, therefore, he has to be
dealt with under the law of this country.

Charles Farr: I am sorry to make this more
complicated, but with the proviso—

Chair: We can’t send him to Mars, can we?

Charles Farr: With the proviso, as I said earlier, that
there is some legal ambiguity about whether people
who are naturalised British nationals rather than born
here may be deprived of their citizenship—I am not
talking about passports—even if it leaves them

stateless, but I hesitate to comment any further on that
because that is an issue of legal concept.

Chair: I am sure you will take many counsels’
opinion on that very important subject.

Q166 Dr Huppert: It is a pleasure to see you in
public in front of this Committee.

Charles Farr: I have been in front of the Committee
before.

Dr Huppert: I am sorry, I lose track of where I have
seen you in public before, but it is very good. We have
seen the security chiefs in public, and I hope they will
be able to come to this Committee as well. On this
issue, you have gone through a whole series of
breaches of the control orders and TPIMs. Do you
believe, whether or not the evidence could be used in
public or not, that he has committed any offence under
UK law other than those associated with control
orders and TPIMs?

Charles Farr: No, because I am sure that we would
have prosecuted him if he had. After all, the very
foundation of control orders, as you know, and
TPIMs, was that they were applied and are applied to
people whom we can neither prosecute nor deport.

Q167 Dr Huppert: Maybe my question was not
quite clear. As I understood it, some of those people
were people on whom we, the state, had evidence but
could not use it in court. Presumably there is another
category where there is no evidence of their
committing a crime under UK law.

Charles Farr: I see what you mean.

Dr Huppert: I am trying to understand how many are
in each of those two categories.

Charles Farr: The short answer is I am not sure. Your
question, as I understand it is, could we prosecute him
in a UK court if there were not sensitivities about
some of the evidence.

Dr Huppert: Absolutely.

Charles Farr: It is a good question and I understand
it. I would have to check that.

Q168 Dr Huppert: Could you say what you can
about this case and the broader ones, because it seems
to me that we would ideally like to not have anybody
in this space, in between conviction and freedom?
Understanding whether the issue is about whether we
can present evidence or whether they have committed
an offence here would be very helpful, but if you can
write to us that would be very helpful.

Charles Farr: Sure.

Q169 Chair: The Home Secretary has announced
that she is going to look at mosques. There are 2,000
mosques in this country. How is she going to find out
which are the mosques that TPIMs people are not
going to be allowed to go to? There are an awful lot
of mosques. There are 52 in Leicester.

Charles Farr: Yes. I thought it was 1,600 around the
country rather than 2,000.

Q170 Chair: There are obviously some that you
might not know about. Tell us, this is a big ambitious
plan, is it not? What is she trying to do?

Ev 22 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

Charles Farr: The Home Secretary has raised the
view that, among the restrictions that could be and
should be imposed on TPIM subjects, prohibition in
certain or all mosques may be one. Those mosques
would be determined by understanding from each
person subject to a TPIM what mosques they frequent,
which is something we would expect to know and
do know as part of the oversight that we have over
their activities.

Q171 Chair: It is not stopping them going to
mosques. It is stopping them going to certain
mosques. Is that right?

Charles Farr: It could be either, but certainly—

Q172 Chair: Under the faith, Friday prayers are in
congregation. You can pray privately, but Friday
prayers are very important to the Muslim community.
Charles Farr: I understand the sensitivity and any
step in this direction would obviously have to be taken
very carefully and the police and the security service
would clearly have a view about whether this was
necessary and proportionate and they would put that
view to the Home Secretary.

Q173 Chair: You have been involved in these areas
for a long time, and you know how important
engagement is with communities. I do not want to
go back to Mohammed Ahmed Mohammed, but the
mosque came out on Panorama and said, “If only we
had known there was a problem with this guy we
would have made sure that we watched him and co-
operated with the authorities so he didn’t go into a
little room and cut off his tag and put on a burka. We
would know what was happening”. Do you think that
there is merit in bringing more people on board in
this fight?

Charles Farr: I am sympathetic to that view, but we
are faced with anonymity orders, as you know, Chair,
and we have meticulously stuck to them. I do think it
is fair comment that anonymity orders can get in the
way of rehabilitation in certain areas. They prevent
you doing some of the things that we would otherwise
want to do under a prevent programme with this
particular group of people.

Q174 Chair: You simply cannot deal with the causes
of terrorism unless you engage with the community.
They are your eyes and ears, are they not?

Charles Farr: I agree, and with mosques in particular.

Q175 Yasmin Qureshi: Just touching on mosques, I
am going to say very clearly that I think the Home
Secretary is completely wrong on this searching of
mosques. In essence, she could go into any place
where there are groups of people. It could be a
wedding, a birthday party, a church, a synagogue or a
temple where there are groups of people. You go in
and you disappear among the groups of people and
take your tag off. How would, necessarily, searching
mosques prevent this sort of thing from happening?
Charles Farr: I do not think people under TPIMs or
control orders would go into some of the other places
that you have listed. I think it is very difficult for the
police and the security services to monitor people

inside mosques and trying to do so raises privacy
issues that are every bit as great as some of those that
you have just mentioned, and the Chair has
mentioned, about stopping people on TPIMs going to
these places themselves. It is a very difficult choice to
make, particularly when these people are under
anonymity orders and securing the co-operation and
collaboration of the authorities of that mosque is,
therefore, much more difficult, if not impossible.

I think we are faced with a problem that people who
have been under TPIMs may have exploited
attendance at mosques for purposes that that mosque,
I am quite sure, would not want and would not intend
and without the knowledge of the committee that
governs that mosque. That is the situation we are
finding ourselves in, in this particular case, and we
want to try to find a way through it.

Q176 Yasmin Qureshi: There are over 2,000
mosques, as has been suggested. Is it going to be the
case then that people are not entitled to go to mosque?
That is the only way you then prevent them
disappearing, isn’t it? How do you find what is a—
Charles Farr: The Home Secretary has asked us to
look at this. This issue will now be referred to a
TPIMs group that comprises people from my office,
the security service and the police. They meet
routinely to look at these cases one by one and to
assess whether the restrictions are appropriate,
proportionate and necessary. They will take on board
the Home Secretary’s statement and intent and will
look at the specific issues of mosques. We will see
where they come to and we will put that back to the
Home Secretary.

Q177 Yasmin Qureshi: We have heard earlier today
about the number of occasions when people on TPIMs
or control orders have absconded. None of them, apart
from this one, was in any mosque, were they?
Charles Farr: I would have to go back over all the
abscond records to determine whether there was—
Yasmin Qureshi: I am sure that if they were, it would
have been mentioned in the media or something.
Charles Farr:—a consistent theme from mosques. It
is not something I have in front of me.

Q178 Yasmin Qureshi: Can I just come on to the
issue about counter-terrorism and our liaison and
working with other countries in particular? As we
know, some of the terrorist plots have significant
overseas connections. I just wanted to explore with
you what kind of things the Government are doing
with other countries and multinational organisations
and agencies to better tackle the threat of terror attacks
or whatever to the United Kingdom?

Charles Farr: One of the key elements of this part of
our counter-terrorist work, Pursue, has been to join up
local activity in this country with activity overseas so
that we have a seamless effort that takes us from this
country to points overseas with which operations in
this country may be connected, and back again. We
have put in a lot of work in this country; a great deal
of investment into local policing but, equally, we have
put a lot of investment into our relations with key
states overseas from which terrorist attacks against

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 23

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

this country might be conducted or with which people
in this country may be dealing in connection with
terrorist-related activity.

There is obviously a list of those; Pakistanis
historically being very much towards the top, but at
the moment North Africa, the Gulf and East Africa
are also very important to us. In some of those
countries the capacity of the Government and the law
enforcement agencies to do counter-terrorism is very
limited, and it may be part of our job to build that
capacity so that we have something to talk to and
something to work with. In recent years, that has
become more complicated because we have found a
need to build compliance as well. In other words, it is
not enough to build the capacity of a police service.
You have to build its compliance with international
human rights law and standards.

We embark on, with our Foreign Office colleagues, a
great deal of work of that kind across a wide range of
countries. Some of that work is done in association
with DFID, whose development programmes,
particularly those that connect to and are about good
governance, are very relevant to some of what we are
trying to achieve as well.

Q179 Yasmin Qureshi: What counter-terrorism role
does the Metropolitan Police have overseas and how
much are we spending on this aspect of the work?
Charles Farr: The Metropolitan Police has a number
of national police functions as well as functions
specific to London, and one of those is to manage
the counter-terrorism liaison network overseas, which
comprises police officers—they are not all from the
Metropolitan Police—located in a number of countries
overseas, particularly those of high priority to us.
They are funded by us. The cost is some low millions
of pounds, and they play a vital role in collecting
evidence and in building capacity in the way that I
have just been describing.

Q180 Yasmin Qureshi: Can I just ask for an example
of one of these overseas capacities which has positive
impact on our interests at home and abroad?

Charles Farr: Sorry, asking for—

Yasmin Qureshi: Is there an example of one of
those capacities?

Charles Farr: I could talk to you about what we are
trying to do in Pakistan, because I think it is
particularly interesting. Eighteen months or so ago we
agreed with the then Government of Pakistan that we
would lead a major effort to build the capacity of their
judicial system to collect evidence on terror suspects
and to prosecute them and to hold them securely in
their prison system. This is a very big programme. It
is bigger than us. We can’t do it all on our own, but
international partners are assisting with it. I think it
has been very successful. It has led us into forensic
training, training prosecutors, training judges and
advising on the reform of the Pakistani prison system.
That is a good example, to me, of capacity building
that helps Pakistan. It helps us because some of the
people they are arresting are of interest to us, and it is
compliant with human rights legislation and our
standards.

Q181 Ian Austin: I want to talk about people from
the UK travelling to fight abroad but, before I do that,
can I just return quickly to this issue about
Mohammed and the TPIM? Do you think it would
have been easier or more difficult for him to have
absconded had he been subject to a relocation order
of the sort that existed under the previous regime?
Charles Farr: I would be hesitant on this point. I do
not believe that a person who is determined to
abscond would necessarily be dissuaded by the fact
that they were living in a city in the UK from which
they did not originally hail.

Q182 Ian Austin: But is it not a fact that under the
original regime there were no relocation orders and
seven people absconded; relocation orders were
introduced and no one absconded; then they were
dropped and two people have absconded? That
suggests that relocation orders have been a useful tool
in preventing people from absconding.

Charles Farr: I think if you are going to compare
control orders and TPIMs you have to compare them
in a rather broader way than that. Both have
characteristics that are relevant. On the specific issue
of relocation, I would simply stick to my point that I
have seen no evidence that people who are determined
to abscond from their orders, be they control orders
or TPIMs, are going to be dissuaded by the fact they
are living 100 miles away from their home city.

Q183 Ian Austin: I want to move on to this issue
about people from the UK travelling to fight abroad.
On the point that the Chairman was raising about his
passport, how many other people who have been
fighting abroad as he was have we enabled to return
to the UK? Would it not have been better for us to
have encouraged the people who detained him abroad
to prosecute him there, and why didn’t that happen?
Charles Farr: It does happen.

Ian Austin: It didn’t in his case. How many other
people have returned—

Charles Farr: It did not in his case because the
Somaliland authorities told us—and this was the basis
for everything that followed—that they did not have
the evidence to prosecute Mohammed in Somaliland.
That was what triggered the obligation placed on us
to facilitate a deportation back to this country; in
exactly the same way as, if we were holding a foreign
national in this country and we could not prosecute,
we would want to facilitate a deportation in the other
direction. It is precisely the same point.

Q184 Chair: Just on that point, it would be
extremely helpful if you could send the Committee
the request from the Somalian Government that he be
returned to the United Kingdom, because this is an
essential part of the evidence you have given today.
You keep saying to us that we had to do this. It is an
obligation, which some of us do not recognise when
it comes to other countries. But if you could send it
as a result of what Mr Austin has said, please send us
that information.

Ev 24 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

Q185 Ian Austin: How many other people do you
know of that we have enabled to return in similar
circumstances?

Charles Farr: UK nationals who have been arrested
for terrorist-related activity overseas, who are not
nationals of any other country and who are deported
back to here?

Chair: No, I think he wants the opposite. How many
deals have you made to keep them abroad? Is that
right, Mr Austin?

Charles Farr: We would not make a deal to keep
them abroad. The only circumstances in which we—
Chair: But you just told this Committee that there are
examples of people who have been left in those
countries.

Charles Farr: Only where they have been prosecuted
by that country.

Chair: Yes. I think Mr Austin wants to know how
many.

Charles Farr: Off the top of my head I have no idea.
Chair: Could you write to us with that?

Charles Farr: Yes, we can certainly try and check
that. Chairman, if I understand, therefore, the question
is, how many people of British nationality have been
convicted overseas and imprisoned overseas for
terrorist-related offences?

Chair: No, how many people in the same position as
Mohammed Ahmed Mohammed who have not been
convicted and prosecuted have the authorities turned
to you and said, “Please have them back, we don’t
want them”, and you have turned around and said,
“We will have them back”? Is that it, Mr Austin?

Ian Austin: Yes.

Chair: Please proceed, Mr Austin. You have other
questions.

Q186 Ian Austin: Can you tell us a little bit about
the work we are doing with other European
Governments to identify people who have travelled
abroad to engage in Jihad or terrorist-related activities
and to what extent you think these people pose a direct
threat to the UK either here or our interests overseas?
Charles Farr: A great deal of work goes on, mainly
operationally, between the agencies and between law
enforcement to identify people across Europe who are
travelling to fight in areas of Jihad. Of course, the
most important for us at the moment is Syria. We in
this country and many other countries have seen
nationals travelling to Syria to fight, and sometimes
they return here as well. There is a lot of collaboration
going on to identify those people and to understand
how best they should be managed.

Q187 Ian Austin: This point about the threat that
they might pose to the UK or our interests overseas?
Charles Farr: Yes. I am sorry I did not address that
point. I think the threat is varied. Some of those
people may pose a threat when—if I take Syria as an
example—they get to Syria and they may, from their
base in Syria, plot attacks back in the UK. Others may
pose a threat to us when they travel back from Syria
themselves and they plan attacks here, either under
the instruction of people outside this country or at
their own initiative. Foreign fighters, so called, in this

particular case British residents or nationals, pose a
threat in a variety of different ways to us.

Q188 Ian Austin: Do they generally know who they
are going to link up with when they get to Syria or do
they go and then make contact with people? How does
it work?

Charles Farr: I think generally they go and make
contact when they are there.

Q189 Ian Austin: I am just interested in this. Some
people would suggest that the west’s failure properly
to support rebel forces in Syria who are more pro-
western and more pluralistic has meant that very
extreme elements among the rebels have been
strengthened and are now dominant. Would it follow
then that people going from the UK are more likely
to fall into the hands of more extreme people because
the west has not supported more western or pluralistic
forces among the rebels? Do you see the point I am
making?

Charles Farr: I do. I think that is very hard to
demonstrate and prove, obviously. A lot of money has
gone into and has been raised by groups in Syria
associated with Al-Qaeda or are sympathetic to it, and
I am not sure how much it was ever within our power
to do anything about that. Those groups are powerful
and people are attracted to them, not just because of
their ideology but because they may be effective
fighting forces who can best offer them protection as
well as opportunity.

Q190 Chair: Mr Austin has raised a very important
point that is going to be relevant to our inquiry. Is
there an increase in the number of British citizens who
are going abroad to fight in conflicts like Syria,
Afghanistan, Iraq and especially the Horn of Africa?
Is this on the increase? Is this a worry? Should we be
concerned about it?

Charles Farr: I do not think there is an issue at the
moment in Afghanistan or in Iraq. There certainly is
an issue in Syria. I think it is very hard for us to say
whether the numbers are increasing. They do not need
to increase to be a big problem.

Q191 Chair: Are we talking about hundreds?
Charles Farr: Yes.

Q192 Chair: Hundreds of British citizens?

Charles Farr: Hundreds of British citizens have either
been to Syria and come back or have been to Syria
and are still in Syria.

Q193 Chair: Are we tracking them? We do not have
exit checks as yet. It would be helpful to have exit
checks, would it not, at airports?

Charles Farr: Exit checks are only one tool that you
can use to try to deal with this problem. I would think
the more important one from our point of view is e-
Borders, which you are very familiar with.

Chair: e-Borders?

Charles Farr: The e-Borders tracking system is
essential and we have put some measures in on top of
e-Borders to try to make it even more effective with
people who we think pose a very significant risk, who

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 25

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

may be going into and, in particular, coming out of
Syria.

Q194 Chair: You are telling this Committee that this
in the hundreds?

Charles Farr: Yes.

Q195 Chair: Some Governments are more friendly
than others. Presumably you cannot do business with
the Syrian Government. They are not going to help
you particularly or us, but other Governments perhaps
are more helpful like Kenya. You would be able to go
to them?

Charles Farr: Yes. I did not answer your question
about—

Chair: Africa.

Charles Farr: Yes, Somalia. People are travelling to
Somalia but not nearly in the numbers that they are
traveling to Syria. I think one of the reasons for that—
and it goes back to Mr Austin’s question—is that it is
easy to get into Syria, mainly through Turkey. Turkey,
of course, is a four-and-a-half hour charter flight away.
It is an easy route to take, much easier than recent
Jihad destinations; either Somalia, Mali, of course, or
indeed Afghanistan.

Q196 Chair: They would go to Turkey and from
Turkey or other countries like that they would make
their way. E-Borders will only tell you where you
book your ticket to on your first destination. If you
then arrive in Turkey and book a ticket to go to
Somalia, that would not be picked up by e-Borders,
would it?

Charles Farr: I don’t think people would go through
Turkey to go to Somalia. Turkey is a route into Syria,
overland of course. As you implied earlier, the route
into Somalia is often, but not only, Kenya. E-Borders
is only one of a number of tools. I think it is
particularly important I raise that in the context of exit
checks. There are other tools that we obviously need
to track people. However, it is very far from being the
case that we know the identity of all the people who
are going to these theatres of Jihad. Some are not
previously known to us and it is certainly not the case
that everyone who is going to Syria is going for
terrorist purposes. A lot of people are going for
humanitarian reasons.

Q197 Chair: Of course. But if you go to Yemen, for
example, you have to go to the Yemen Embassy in
order to get a visa to go to Yemen.

Charles Farr: Yes.

Q198 Chair: Are we asking and working with
Governments like Yemen?

Charles Farr: Yes.

Q199 Chair: They will give you information as to
who has applied?

Charles Farr: Subject to human rights considerations,
which you are very familiar with.

Q200 Chair: Also data protection, of course, and all
the other things.

Charles Farr: All those things. We would be wanting
and do work with the Government on that.

Q201 Chair: Is there an age profile for these
Jihadists?

Charles Farr: Yes, the usual age profile that applies
to people who are of interest to us in a lot of different
terrorist scenarios.

Chair: Which is what?

Charles Farr: 19 to 30.

Q202 Michael Ellis: Mr Farr, I would like to move
on now, if I may. Just before I do so, though, on the
Mohammed issue you have pointed out how he was
effectively playing the criminal justice system. Those
are my words. Is it correct that he was taking civil
action against the British Government for damages in
any respect? Was he suing the British Government?
Charles Farr: Yes. The chronology I gave you, which
I thought was complicated enough, is more
complicated because he has taken out a civil damages
action against the British Government in connection
with his deportation and arrest in Somaliland.

Q203 Michael Ellis: Surely it could be our turn to
stay that because he has now absconded. Are we
applying to the courts to stay the action against us?
Charles Farr: The CPS is looking at how to deal with
the various legal applications he has against us.
Michael Ellis: Right. I think you are going to provide
the Committee with a chronology.

Charles Farr: We will give you a chronology, yes.

Q204 Michael Ellis:	Can I move on to

communications data? David Omand, former head of
GCHQ, made a recent assertion on BBC Radio, I
think it was, about GCHQ’s capabilities and I want to
ask you specifically in	connection	with

communications data. He was being asked in
connection with the Snowden leaks and I will come
to that, but is it your strong assessment as Director
General of Security and Counter-Terrorism, that
communications data are necessary and, if so, why?
Charles Farr: It is definitely my assessment that
communications data are necessary. They are
necessary for the investigation of any crime that is
being committed over the internet, cybercrime or
cyber-enabled crime. That is certainly the case. It is
also my assessment that communications data
legislation is necessary and, more importantly, that
remains the view of the Home Secretary who, as you
know, continues to believe that communications data
legislation of some kind is essential to enable law
enforcement and intelligences agencies to do their job.

Q205 Michael Ellis: I should say I sat on committee
looking at the draft Communications Data Bill with
Dr Huppert and others. Is it still very much the
assessment of you as Director General of Security and
Counter-Terrorism that that is an essential cog in the
wheel of the fight against terrorism in this country?
Charles Farr: I know that it has been claimed that
GCHQ programmes that have been exposed by
Snowden and publicised in the press allegedly indicate
that GCHQ has been collecting all the

Ev 26 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

communications data that we were trying to obtain
through legislation. That is not the case. It is incorrect.
GCHQ has never collected the data required by law
enforcement agencies and other agencies in this
country and it never would and it has never been
considered that it should collect those data either.
GCHQ and GCHQ capabilities are not relevant and
are not a substitute for communications data
legislation.

Q206 Michael Ellis: That could not be clearer.
Dealing with a point that you made, the head of MI6
and the others went to the Intelligence and Security
Committee last week. The head of MI6 said that
terrorists were effectively rubbing their hands with
glee at the Snowden leaks. It is quite clear that chatter
has been picked up that indicated that terrorists were
very pleased indeed with what Snowden had done and
what had been published in the Guardian. Is it your
position, as Director General of Security and Counter-
Terrorism, that you agree with that assessment from
Sir John Sawers, the head of MI6?

Charles Farr: I agree with everything that has been
said, both at the hearing last week and previously by
Andrew Parker and others. I think the key point is
very simple. By revealing secret capabilities and
techniques, Snowden and others have made those
techniques and capabilities less effective. It is
factually wrong to claim that those techniques were
already known to terrorists and terrorist groups. The
basis of those claims, which I continue to hear, is very
unclear to me, but we do not believe them to be true.

Q207 Michael Ellis: Is it within your knowledge, as
it is with Sir John Sawers at MI6, that terrorists are
rubbing their hands with glee? You might use a
different phrase. I invite you to do so if you wish, but
is that within your knowledge? There are those who
are asking for evidence. I can understand why you
might not be able to provide evidence, but are you
satisfied in your own mind that dangerous persons are
extremely pleased with what has happened?

Charles Farr: I am completely satisfied about that
and, of course, it is not just terrorists who fall into
that category. There are lots of other bad people out
there who are, as John said, rubbing their hands with
glee as well. I think you are right that it is illogical to
expect the Government to identify what capabilities
have been made less effective and how, because the
effect of doing so would be to make them even less
effective than they are already.

Michael Ellis: I would not want you to do that.

Q208 Chair: On what you saw in the Guardian, did
you discover anything—you do not have to tell me
what was secret and what was not—that you did not
know about? I would have thought that you, the head
of the office of Security and Counter-Terrorism, would
know all this stuff. Was there anything new that you
read in the Guardian that you would not have seen in
your confidential briefings?

Charles Farr: There was material in the Guardian
about NSA that was completely new to me.

Chair: Really? So it was fresh information.

Charles Farr: There was material in the Guardian
and other outlets, of course, about NSA that was
completely new to me.

Q209 Chair: It would not have come through your
usual network and the cooperation with other
agencies?

Charles Farr: No, nor would I expect it to. I do not
believe I need—

Q210 Chair: Was that confidential?

Charles Farr: Yes. Secret, not confidential.

Q211 Mr Winnick: Stuff that came from the
National Security Agency?

Charles Farr: Yes.

Q212 Mr Winnick: Like the manner in which the
Guardian stated, arising from the revelations of
Snowden, that the German Chancellor’s phone was
hacked. Was that aid to the terrorist?

Charles Farr: It is not a matter that has involved me
and I hesitate to comment on alleged NSA operations.

Q213 Mr Winnick: Continuing from what Mr Ellis
asked you, what do you feel, Mr Farr, about various
people who are not necessarily connected with what
could be described broadly as the Liberal
establishment who have argued since the Guardian
have published these details that it is worthwhile to
have a debate? For example, a former director general
of MI5 and a former director of GCHQ have stated
that the intelligence agencies need to be more
transparent. The former chair of the Intelligence and
Security Committee, a Tory peer Lord King, said the
laws governing the British Intelligence Agency
needed to be overhauled and so on and so forth.
Charles Farr: In many ways I completely agree with
them, but I think there is a fundamental distinction
between encouraging a debate over the oversight of
the intelligence agencies and having effective
oversight, which, in my experience, everyone working
in the agencies would strongly support, and the public
disclosure of secret capabilities, which undermines
our national security. Those are two different things.
Everyone working in and outside the agency wants
effective oversight. I have never met anyone who
would think to the contrary. What they would say is
that that does not require publication in the national
media of sensitive capabilities in a way that is
designed to or has the effect of damaging our security.

Q214 Mr Winnick: You may have heard the US
Secretary of State being interviewed on the radio
today. Mainly the questions were about the
negotiations of the Iranian regime, but near the end of
the interview he was asked about the Snowden
revelations and he said the President was carrying out
a wide review of the intelligence gathering that has
occurred and whether it was too extensive or not. That
would not have happened without Snowden, would it?
Charles Farr: I just want to make one point, if I may,
about this. I think some people have assumed that the
legal provisions and enablers for the NSA and the
United States are the same as those for GCHQ; that

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 27

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

GCHQ operates under the same legal provisions as
the NSA. That, of course, is completely not the case.
GCHQ operates under completely different legal
parameters and does things in a rather different way.
I think one should be careful about drawing analogies
between NSA and GCHQ. They work very closely
together, but not in every respect and they do not work
in systems that are identical. I hear what you say, Mr
Winnick, about Mr Kerry. I can’t comment on that.
That seems to me a matter for the US.

Q215 Mr Winnick: The Guardian and newspapers
in the United States, the New York Times and the
Washington Post, in carrying not all—I emphasise not
all, as the Prime Minister has admitted as far as the
Guardian is concerned—revelations from the whistle-
blower, Edward Snowden. Surely the argument is not
that these newspapers want to aid and abet terrorism?
What do you think?

Charles Farr: Nor did I suggest that they had set out
to do so. What I was saying is that the effect of what
has been publicised may be to enable terrorists to do
things that they may not have otherwise done.

Q216 Mr Winnick: Mr Farr, you said “maybe”.
Despite what you said to Mr Austin, there is no
evidence as such—

Charles Farr: I am not going to be drawn on the
evidence, for exactly the reason I said earlier—putting
that evidence in open forum would merely make the
situation we find ourselves in even more difficult.

Q217 Dr Huppert: Mr Farr, I know you choose your
words very carefully on all of these things so can I
just check that I have understood what you were
saying about a couple of issues that were quite
interesting? You said that you had learned things
about the NSA that you had not previously known
from the revelation that occurred. Did you learn
anything about activities by GCHQ or any of the other
intelligence and security agencies that you did not
already know? Again, I do not need to know exactly
what.

Charles Farr: I am not surprised in my own mind
that I learned things that were new about the NSA. I
did not need to know them and, in my view, I do not
particularly need to know them now, but I do. I did not
learn things that were new about GCHQ capabilities. I
did learn things that were new about GCHQ-specific
operations and, again, I would not have expected or
needed to know about those operations in the job that
I hold.

Q218 Dr Huppert: You also said to Mr Ellis—and I
am now paraphrasing, I did not get very good
scribbled notes—GCHQ has not collected the
communications data that agencies would need. Could
I just check what you mean by that? Are you saying
that GCHQ has never collected any communications
data about anything in the UK or anything to do with
UK citizens? What exactly did you mean, so I don’t
misunderstand?

Charles Farr: I meant precisely what I said, which is
that GCHQ has never and will never collect on their
existing legal authorisations the communications data

required by law enforcement agencies in this country
and indeed the security agencies and which we were
seeking to provide for in the communications data
legislation.

Q219 Dr Huppert: When you say “required by”,
they do not have any of it at all. Is that what you are
saying? They do not collect any information about
who rang who or who emailed who. You say they do
not have any of that information at all? That seems
surprising.

Charles Farr: No, I did not say that. Of course, in
their role as a foreign intelligence gathering
organisation, they do collect communications and
communications data. My point was specifically about
the UK and about the data that we were seeking to
obtain through legislation, and my point was that
GCHQ cannot provide those data themselves.

Q220 Dr Huppert: But if I send an e-mail to the
Chair and that e-mail goes out of the country and then
back in again on its way, they can collect the
communications data once it is outside of the country,
if I understand it correctly.

Charles Farr: We are getting into a level of detail
that I can’t get into in this forum. I would repeat very
clearly	that	GCHQ	is not a	substitute	for

communications data legislation and the claim that
GCHQ is	already	collecting	the sort	of

communications data or the amount of
communications data that we are seeking through
legislation is wrong.

Q221 Dr Huppert: In that case, can I move on to a
couple of other issues? We have talked a lot about
the effects of some of the Snowden revelations. The
ultimate source of the leak was the NSA which has
hundreds of thousands of contractors who were able
to have a look at material that apparently is incredibly
damaging. What steps have been taken, firstly, to
make sure that we have better security within the UK,
that there are not hundreds of thousands of people
who can get access to this, and, secondly, to get the
NSA to sharpen up their practices? If they are this lax
about our material we should surely be very wary
about working with them.

Charles Farr: As you know, that question was asked
of the agency heads last week, and I refer you to their
reply. Clearly it is an issue and they are responsible
for dealing with it, both here and in their discussions
with the NSA, but I do not think it would be
appropriate—and I apologise—for me to go any
further than that.

Q222 Dr Huppert: During the discussions about
communications data we had quite a productive
exchange about transparency, about how
communications data were currently used. As you
know, there are 570,000 or so requests, but we do not
have an idea of how many people that relates to or
what sort of cases that relates to. I think it was
question 907. You said you completely accepted that
and you are trying to get those data. How much
progress have you made on that? I and, I suspect,
many people think it would be very helpful to have

Ev 28 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

that sort of factual basis. Not about what individual is
being monitored, of course, but what the agencies are
looking for, what the crimes are or non-crimes, how
many people are covered by this and that sort of
information that is now routinely produced by Google
and others.

Charles Farr: Yes. I am not sure about—

Dr Huppert: I am sorry. The Google requests that
they use to make Google reports. They can report how
many requests they have had and how many people
that applied to.

Charles Farr: I see what you mean.

Dr Huppert: Sorry, that is what I meant.

Charles Farr: I understand. As you know, there were
indeed 580,000 or thereabouts communications data
requests. You are absolutely right, as we have
discussed many times before, that that very large
number of communications data requests relates to a
much smaller number of people because one person
under investigation will lose a lot of different
instruments and—

Q223 Dr Huppert: Or requests can be for multiple
people, so it could be a larger number as well.
Charles Farr: Yes, in theory, but in practice it is not.
It is for a very much smaller number of people. It is
right to challenge us, clearly, to produce more data on
that. We are doing that and I would prefer to write
back to you if I may, Chair, and give you a progress
report about what we are doing.

Chair: Please, if you could. That would be very
helpful.

Q224 Ian Austin: Without wishing to diminish the
importance of Members of this Committee, are there
any circumstances you can envisage under which the
security services might stop monitoring the people on
TPIMs, the 2,000 people on the watch list, people
travelling abroad to Syria, and start to look at e-mails
from Mr Huppert from the Chairman of the
Committee? I mean it is just fanciful nonsense, isn’t
it?

Yasmin Qureshi: It is not fanciful.

Q225 Ian Austin: The secret services are not
interested in this stuff, are they? They are far too
busy—

Charles Farr: I can only agree with you profoundly.
There are no circumstances in which they could or
would do that.

Q226 Ian Austin: Exactly, and I think it is important
to recognise that, because there is some general
scepticism and suspicion about the work of the
security services on this, but they are not interested in
text messages and emails sent by members of the
public to other members of the public, are they? You
talked and last week the heads of the intelligence
services talked about the damage done by The
Guardian's leaks in terms of the information they
published, but can I ask you for your assessment of
how responsibly you think The Guardian acted in
handling that information. Oliver Robbins, who is the
Deputy National Security Adviser, called into
question the way the information had been handled.

He said that it was being transported without proper
security controls; that, while much of the material was
encrypted, among the unencrypted documents was a
piece of paper that included the password for
decrypting one of the encrypted files. How responsible
was the way The Guardian handled this information?
Chair: Some of those issues are sub judice, so if you
can confine yourself to—

Charles Farr: I know. I understand the question. I
would rather—

Ian Austin: All of that was published in The
Telegraph.

Chair: It was published in The Telegraph? It must be
true then, so you can comment on it.

Ian Austin: It might not be true, but I should think it
is not sub judice.

Chair: No, quite.

Charles Farr: May I answer the question in a rather
broader way, given the legal sensitivities around some
of this, which I do think is still present? I would
simply repeat what I have said already. The exposure
of the information that was, in my view, stolen by
Snowden—58,000 documents from GCHQ, all of
them secret—reveals capabilities that we have and
makes them less effective. There is no doubt about
that.

Ian Austin: Could you speak up a bit? I can't—
Charles Farr: Yes, I am sorry. I was merely saying
that the exposure by Snowden of the documents that
we removed from NSA, including 58,000 from
GCHQ, has had the effect of eroding the capabilities
that are the basis for our national security, some of the
capabilities, and that has done and will continue to do
us damage in the future and I would prefer, if I may,
to leave it there rather than discuss The Guardian.

Q227 Yasmin Qureshi: Regarding the Snowden
leak, you said there was the aspect about damaging
operational capabilities, I think. Obviously, without
going into details of what we are talking about here,
are you talking about things like investigations that
have been carried out by the intelligence services in
different parts of the world, that kind of information?
Charles Farr: No, I am not talking about that and it
is important that I do clarify that, if I left you with
that impression. I am not talking about specific
operations or at least not only about specific
operations. I am talking about general capabilities,
things that the agencies can do. It is both of those that,
once exposed, become less effective.

Q228 Yasmin Qureshi: Can I then ask this other
question? I know some people may accuse me of
being liberal on these issues, but we have known
historically, I think for decades, that virtually every
country in the world will carry out surveillance, phone
tapping, look at taxies, e-mails of various people,
whether they are nationals or they are Angela Merkel
or whether they are other people, if they think that
person is of interest to them. We know as far back as
the 1960s that Harold Wilson at 10 Downing Street
was being listened into by the intelligence services of
our country. Is there a question of embarrassment, in
the sense that people did not realise the extent of the
surveillance that there is? I think some of us are aware

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 29

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

of the fact that there is a much more detailed level of
surveillance and of the methodologies like telephone
tapping, bugs in the phone, monitoring e-mails.
Charles Farr: I think in general terms you are right,
but the material that has been disclosed by Snowden
does not describe this in general terms. It describes
this in terms of minute detail, and that is the
difference. I think it is one thing for people to be
theoretically aware of security risks. We are, you are,
others are. It is another for them to be told detail about
how these operations work.

Q229 Chair: Let us end where we began, which is
the concerns we have about the fact that people have
disappeared while on TPIMs. While accepting all the
evidence we have received from both yourself and
David Anderson, this is not something that we
particularly want to read about, bearing in mind that
there are so few people on it. About 20% have now
gone off and absconded. Is it an operational issue? We
have talked about the police, and we know you are
not here to make policy. You implement it, though of
course you are one of the Home Secretary’s principal
advisers on this issue. I am looking at the budget of
the Single Intelligence Account that you, in the end,
control of £1.9 billion, and the Metropolitan Police’s
counter-terrorism budget of £567 million. That is a
huge amount of money and, at the end of the day,
what people read about is when somebody gets into a
mosque and puts on a burka and leaves their tag and
somebody else hails a taxi. Ibrahim Magag has still
not been found a year later. The Home Secretary
comes to the House. She raises reporting restrictions.
There is a great drama, pages and pages of newsprint
about this. Is it an operational problem in the end?
Charles Farr: May I correct one thing first?

Chair: Yes.

Charles Farr: I do not have responsibility for the
agency budgets. That is not my responsibility.

Chair: Who would have?

Charles Farr: The Cabinet Office, in particular. We
have responsibility for some aspects of those.
However, your main point is different. It is true that
the agencies do have very big budgets and you are
right in that the CT police network here receives £570
million. By the way, on top of that is the additional
money that was provided under the TPIM package,
which is how I see it.

Chair: How much was that?

Charles Farr: May I just say that it was tens of
millions, so it was substantial. That being said, you
will recall that Andrew Park, in his speech last month
or the month before, quoted the figure of 2,000 people
of interest to them in this country. That is merely one
aspect of agency business in this country and
controlling even a percentage of that number is a very
challenging and resource-intensive task and, as I know
from first-hand experience in a variety of different
jobs, is very expensive. These figures that you quote,
accurately, are very large, but so is the size of the
challenge we face just on CT much less before you
include other issues that the agencies deal with as
well, both in this country and overseas.

Q230 Chair: We never get to hear about, except
during the trial, all the plots that have been uncovered
and all the disasters that have been averted.

Charles Farr: Yes.

Q231 Chair: Obviously you do not control the press,
nobody does. We have a free press in this country, but
a lot of attention is directed—one man disappearing
in a burka must take up a huge amount of your time,
combined with all the other stuff that you deal with.
Charles Farr: Yes. You are getting to an issue that I
did want to raise if I had the opportunity, so perhaps
I can.

Chair: Please.

Charles Farr: There are eight people currently on
TPIMs. There were 52 people ever on control orders.
Andrew quoted a figure of 2,000 of interest. Control
orders and TPIMs, executive orders of any kind, have
only ever applied to a tiny fraction of the number of
people of interest to us in this country and the number
of people who are of operational interest at any one
time. I think it is important to keep the issue of these
executive orders, be they control orders or TPIMs, in
perspective. They apply to a relatively small number
of the people who concern us, and they are not
necessarily the people who are the most immediate
threat either. They are, as you know, the people whom
we can neither prosecute nor deport and feel as though
we have no alternative but to put on an order of this
kind.

Q232 Chair: But you are satisfied that the state of
the security services and our counter-terrorism policy
and the operational part is in good order?

Charles Farr: You are doing your work on this, so I
will be very interested to read your conclusions. My
view is that we have developed over the past 10 years
or so here, with a great deal of funding, a very
sophisticated Pursue operation within a strategy that
is as good as any you can find around the world.
Occasionally, it will not deal with all the risks that we
want because any programme of this kind cannot
reduce risk to zero. I think we have to accept that, but
with that proviso, it is as good as the system in any
other country and better than the system that we have
had at any stage before.

Q233 Chair: Are you happy that the internet
companies are doing their best to insure that the
Jihadists and those who use the internet and social
media are not allowing abuse of this medium that
seems to have grown? It used to be, “Go to Madrassa
and be radicalised”. Now it can happen in a room on
the internet, can’t it?

Charles Farr: Your Committee has reported on this
before in the context of your Prevent work and I think
you, in that work, identified some of the big
challenges. Those challenges have not gone away and
I certainly would not say that we yet have the
relationship with all communications service
providers on matters relating to terrorism that we
would like. You put forward the view in your report
that we should have a code of practice, and we are
taking that up now. The Minister for security, who I
am sure will talk to you, is talking to a wide range of

Ev 30 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

12 November 2013 Charles Farr

CSPs about that, but there are many other areas where Chair: Of course. Mr Farr, thank you very much for
we need help as well.	coming today.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 31

Tuesday 3 December 2013

Members present:

Keith Vaz (Chair)

Ian Austin	Yasmin Qureshi

Nicola Blackwood	Mark Reckless

Michael Ellis	Mr David Winnick

Paul Flynn
Dr Julian Huppert

Examination of Witness

Witness: Alan Rusbridger, Editor, The Guardian, gave evidence.

Q234 Chair: I welcome to today’s session our
witness Alan Rusbridger, the Editor of The Guardian.
Mr Rusbridger, you are giving evidence as part of the
Committee’s inquiry into counter-terrorism. Thank
you very much for coming here this afternoon. Could
I refer all those present to the Register of Members’
Interests where the interests of the members of this
Committee are noted. Could I ask other members to
declare any special interests?

Dr Huppert: I have written two articles for The
Guardian on this issue for which, as a pleasant
surprise, I was paid. I need to draw the Committee’s
attention to this.

Q235 Chair: Thank you very much. Of course I
should say that we are all Guardian readers, some
more avidly than others, so we all declare our
interests. I did read it this morning.

Mr Rusbridger, could we start with some facts and
then members of the Committee will come in and
probe you on a number of issues? There was reference
made in some newspapers that you have been
compelled to come here against your wishes. We
wrote to you and invited you to come here and you
are here as part of that inquiry. You do not feel under
any compulsion, do you?

Alan Rusbridger: I was not aware it was optional, but
I am glad to be here anyway.

Q236 Chair: Well, you said yes, so there was no
need to take that further. On the question of facts,
you said very clearly in your written evidence to this
Committee that you have published only 1% of the
information that you have from Mr Snowden. Is that
still correct?

Alan Rusbridger:	It is approximately correct.

Remember we continue to publish stuff, but it is about
1% of what we were given.

Q237 Chair: As far as I can see, you have had
58,000 files. Are you telling this Committee that only
1% of the information in those files has now gone
public?

Alan Rusbridger: Yes.

Chair: Where are the other files?

Alan Rusbridger: Can I give some general context
that I think would help you understand about this,
because I think it is important to realise that initial
leak from Edward Snowden—

Q238 Chair: We will come to that in a minute, Mr
Rusbridger. If you could just establish the facts for
me, and please do put it in context. These are factual
questions the Committee would like to ask. You have
a lot of files, 58,000 files; you have published 1%.
Where are the other files?

Alan Rusbridger: Well, as I would have explained,
this is an ongoing story that we are writing. If you
think it is sensible that I talk here about where the
exact files are I am happy to write to you, but I am
not sure that that is a sensible thing to do about the
existence of other files in different bits of the world.

Q239 Chair: Are there other files under your control
in different parts of the world?

Alan Rusbridger: There is one file that we hold
jointly with The New York Times, which is obviously
in New York.

Q240 Chair: This is important in respect of the
inquiry. Obviously the context is important but there
is criticism that some of these files may not be under
your control. Are they all under your control one way
or the other?

Alan Rusbridger: No. One of them, as I would have
explained—I think it would be helpful if I could give
some context because it is important to understand
that there were four different sets of information that
went to four different parties in four different
countries in three different continents. It is important
to establish that to begin with. One of them was The
Guardian, one of them was the Washington Post,
clearly not under my control. One went to Rio and
one went to Germany. That is the hand of cards we
were all dealt—The Guardian, the security services,
Governments. So I cannot obviously say that The
Washington Post files are under my control, because
they are not.

Q241 Chair: No, of course not. We are in touch with
The New York Times and we may take evidence from
The New York Times in the future, written or oral. But
in terms of the files under your control, 99% of which
have not been published, you have full control, you
know where they are, they are secure and in a place
where you feel they cannot get into other people’s
hands?

Alan Rusbridger: I believe that to be true.

Ev 32 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

Q242 Chair: You also said in reply to our
parliamentary colleague, Julian Smith, in a letter that
was published that there are 850,000 people in the
world who have the same information as you have in
those files.

Alan Rusbridger: This goes to the original leak,
which is obviously the thing that people are most
concerned about. We were told that 850,000 people
had access to the information that a 29-year-old in
Hawaii, who was not even employed by the American
Government, had access to.

Q243 Chair: Is this 850,000 people a figure given to
you of people who have security clearance or would
know what was in the files that you have?

Alan Rusbridger: Obviously people were aghast. I
think people at GCHQ were aghast that a 29-year-
old in Hawaii, not even employed by the American
Government, could get access to their files. I was told
the figure was 850,000 people who had that kind of
access.

Q244 Chair: Obviously there is a lot of controversy
regarding your publication of this information. Is part
of the defence that you may have this information but
so do 850,000 other people and they are also in the
same position if they choose to be, as Mr Snowden
was, to release this information—that there is safety
in numbers, in other words?

Alan Rusbridger: I think the point is that twice in the
last three years these giant databases that were created
after 9/11 have proved porous. These secret things
have escaped and that is because so many people have
access to them. That is the only point that I think we
were trying to make. People use the word
“catastrophe” or the fact that there has been this
catastrophic loss and have compared it with Maclean
and Burgess, Philby, all kinds of things. That was
down to the original leak, and that was because this
29 year-old, who was one of hundreds of thousands
of people, had access to information. I am sure it is
something that everyone must now be considering
what to do about it.

Q245 Chair: In respect of what was said to our sister
Committee, the Intelligence and Security Committee,
you were severely criticised. You were perhaps not
criticised personally but your newspaper certainly
was, and so was the decision that you took, by the
heads of the security services, and this is your
opportunity to answer them. Mr Andrew Parker
described what you and your newspaper did as a gift
that our enemies needed to evade us and to strike us
at will. I am sure you have heard this phrase before.
John Sawers, the head of MI6, said that our
adversaries were rubbing their hands with glee. All
heads of the security services were very clear in their
evidence to the Intelligence and Security Committee
that you had damaged this country as a result of what
you had done. Clearly other editors took the decision
as well. We know it has been in The New York Times,
The Washington Post, El País, Le Monde and other
newspapers, but they are not before us today. Do you
recognise what you have done? Do you accept that
this has damaged the country? This is severe criticism

that I have not seen before from the head of our
security services.

Alan Rusbridger: I think it is an important context
that editors of probably the world’s leading
newspapers—in America, The Washington Post and
The New York Times—took virtually identical
decisions, so this is not a rogue newspaper. These are
serious newspapers that have long experience of
dealing with national security. The problem with these
accusations is that they tend to be very vague and they
are not rooted in the specific stories. You have quoted
two. I would like to quote four people back at you
who have told me personally there has been no
damage or who have not seen it. You took evidence I
think last week from Norman Baker, the current Home
Office Minister—I will not repeat that evidence—who
said he had seen no damage.

Chair: Yes, that is right.

Alan Rusbridger: The second person we have
consulted is a member of the Senate Intelligence
Committee, so somebody who is sitting in oversight
of all the intelligence and has seen it all. He asked not
to be named, but we asked him because we want to
know, “Have you seen anything The Guardian has
published that has caused damage?” and he said, “I
have been incredibly impressed by what you have
done, how you have done it. You have written about
the scope and the scale. I have seen nothing that you
have done that has caused damage.” We asked the
same question of a senior administration official in the
current Obama Administration who told us last week,
“I have been incredibly impressed by the judgment
and care that you would expect from a great news
organisation”. Finally, a senior Whitehall official at
the heart of these stories said on 9 September, “I have
not seen anything you have published to date which
has risked lives”. So there are different views about
this and I listen with respect to the views that you
have given, but I do not—

Q246 Chair: But you disagree with them?

Alan Rusbridger: Well, it is not that I disagree. It is
impossible to assess, because no one has given me
specific evidence and I hear the contrary from
respected people.

Q247 Chair:	The real criticism is that the

information that you have contains the names of
individual security officers, and this has been sent
around the world, sometimes paid for by The
Guardian, and these names are of our security
officers, people who are there to protect our country.
That is how you have damaged the country, because
others who do not have security clearance have been
able to read these names, know who they are and
possibly know where they live. That is the damage
that they allege you have done.

Alan Rusbridger: First of all, we have never used a
single name. I think that is the crucial bit. We have
published no names and we have lost control of no
names. It has never been a secret that these documents
contain names. A lot of them are PowerPoint
presentations given by named individual. From the
beginning of June when we published the first
presentation we redacted the name of somebody. It

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 33

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

was apparent that these documents had names, and
then the material was seized off David Miranda under
the terror laws. It is apparent from the witness
statements that the Government knew then, although
I would say they knew already, and in fact we
discussed the use of names with the Cabinet Secretary
when he visited us in mid-June. So there have been
six months when it has been apparent that there have
been names in these documents. I told the Cabinet
Secretary personally that we were sharing this
material with the New York Times. On 22 July I gave
the editor of The New York Times phone number,
email address, and Stephen Engelberg from
ProPublica. Not once in six months—

Q248 Chair: I find it difficult that you are telling this
Committee that you can guarantee the security of all
the names of these officers.

Alan Rusbridger: Your original question was do I
believe that the copy that The New York Times has is
being held securely. Yes.

Q249 Chair: Well all the copies, anything under your
control. You have these names. Can you guarantee
that these names will not leak out?

Alan Rusbridger: I can only talk about the copies
under the joint control of the Guardian and the New
York Times and I can say that that is being held
securely.

Chair: You can guarantee it? Right. Now, both the
criticism—

Alan Rusbridger: Incidentally, Chairman, I just want
to add that in that six months it would have been open
to anybody from Her Majesty’s Government to come
and ask about the names and that has not happened.

Q250 Chair: Has anyone asked you to destroy this
information or hand it over?

Alan Rusbridger: It is a matter of public record that
the Cabinet Secretary came and asked me to destroy
the entire cache of documents, so yes.

Q251 Chair: Right. But you have not done so?

Alan Rusbridger: No, that is also a matter of public
record. No, I told the Cabinet Secretary at the time.

Q252 Chair: Let me ask you this finally before I go
to other members of this Committee, some of the
criticism against you and The Guardian have been
very personal, you and I were both born outside this
country, but I love this country. Do you love this
country?

Mr Winnick: How do you answer that kind of
question.

Alan Rusbridger: We live in a democracy. Most of
the people working on this story are British people
who have families in this country who love this
country. I am slightly surprised to be asked the
question. But, yes, we are patriots and one of the
things we are patriotic about is the nature of the
democracy and the nature of a free press and the fact
that one can in this country discuss and report these
things.

Q253 Chair: So the reason why you have done this
has not been to damage the country; it is to help the
country understand what is going on so far as
surveillance is concerned?

Alan Rusbridger: I think there are countries and they
are not generally democracies where the press are not
free to write about these things and where the security
services do tell editors what to write and where
politicians do censor newspapers. That is not the
country that we live in, in Britain. It is not the country
that America is, and it is one of the things I love about
this country that we have that freedom to write and
report and to think and we have some privacy. Those
are the concerns that need to be balanced against
national security, which no one is under-estimating. I
can speak for the entire Guardian staff who have
families who live in this country; they want to be
secure, too.

Q254 Dr Huppert: Thank you, Mr Rusbridger, for
coming before this Committee. I hope we will have
similar co-operation from the intelligence and security
services because I think many of us would like to ask
them questions. Now that they have established they
can answer them in public and it should just be the
people that they trust to answer questions, they should
be able to answer everyone’s. Could I also place it on
record briefly that I think The Guardian has done a
great service to the public debate in this country? I
have put that at length elsewhere and we had a
Westminster Hall debate on it, and I think it is up to
Parliament how to write the rules now.

You have published very selectively. You have taken
off these documents only very small elements and
published those. If, when you were given the
documents, you had refused them and sent them back,
what do you think would have happened to the
information? Would it have been silenced or would it
have been published in some other mechanism?

Alan Rusbridger: That is why I wanted the initial
context to be understood. By the way, I do not think
there is an editor on Earth who, offered this material,
would have sent it back unseen. We asked 30 leading
editors in the world to talk about this difficulty of
handling secret material and they were all familiar
with doing it. They all said they would have done
what The Guardian did. You look at it and you make
judgments. People talk about mass dumps of data. We
have not. I think we have published 26 documents so
far out of the 58,000-plus that we have seen. We have
made very selective judgments about what to print.
What would have happened if we had sent it back?
That is the whole point of my initial point to the
Chairman. Glenn Greenwald had this material in Rio.
Laura Poitras had a copy in Berlin. The Washington
Post had a copy. The thought that this material would
not have been published is ridiculous.

Q255 Dr Huppert: As you know, there is a DA-
Notice system in the UK that is intended to prevent
people being put at risk, particularly where there is
real risk to life. Have you had any conversations with
the DA-Notice Secretary and have they told you that
the material would pose a risk to life?

Ev 34 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

Alan Rusbridger: Yes, we have. I think we have gone
back and counted this. Out of all the stories that we
have published, and there are about 35 of them, we
have consulted with the relevant authorities on all bar
one, which was the first story that we published
specifically about GCHQ. I think that was on 16 June.
The reason I did not consult with the DA-Notice
Committee was a fear of prior restraint, which exists
in this country but not in the United States. Since the
Pentagon papers case in 1972 it is inconceivable that
any American Government would get prior restraint
of a publication of this material. That reassurance does
not exist in this country. Indeed, we were directly
threatened with prior restraint by the Cabinet
Secretary and so I did not seek the advice of the DA-
Notice Committee on that story.

I have engaged with Air Vice-Marshal Vallance since.
I think Air Vice-Marshal Vallance would confirm that
we have been in touch and that there was also, to
some extent, a misunderstanding that he said extended
to the Prime Minister. I think there was a lot of
misunderstanding by the DA-Notice Committee
because the Prime Minister has talked about
threatening people with DA-Notices. That is not how
it works. Air Vice-Marshal Vallance says that the
misunderstanding is that he would have kept that
material confidential from the Government. We have,
in fact, collaborated with him since and he has been
at The Guardian to talk to all our reporters.

Q256 Dr Huppert: Did he give you any feedback as
to whether what you are publishing posed a risk to
life or not?

Alan Rusbridger: He was quite explicit that nothing
we had seen contravened national security in terms of
risking life. He was explicit about that. That is not to
say he would give us a complete bill of health on
things that appeared downstream, but nothing he saw
had risk to life and most of the time when we have
rung him and put stories to him his response is, “There
is nothing that concerns me there. This stuff might be
politically embarrassing, but there is nothing here that
is risking national security”.

Dr Huppert: It seems like you followed established
procedure for the vast majority of these things.

Alan Rusbridger: On all but the one story.

Q257 Dr Huppert: You have touched on issues that
are of fundamental national importance; fundamental
questions about the future of surveillance, information
that was not given to us on the Communications Data
Bill, and a whole range of things about the future of
privacy in a digital age. In Germany there is huge
interest in this subject. In the US there is huge interest,
with parliamentarians trying to revisit legislation and
responses from the President. Why do you think there
has been so little interest here? A few of us managed
to secure this one big parliamentary debate, but
otherwise what we have seen, and even there, was
attacks on The Guardian rather than Parliament trying
to work out what the rules ought to be. Why do you
think that is?

Alan Rusbridger: Shooting the messenger is the
oldest diversionary trick in the book. I cannot explain
why some people have not taken interest in this. My

experience is that, when you speak to people about it
and explain the issues, they are deeply interested in it.
As you say, in terms of the broader debate, I cannot
think of any story in recent times that has ricocheted
around the world like this has and which been more
broadly debated in Parliaments, in the courts and
among NGOs.

The roll call of people who have said that there needs
to be a debate about this include, by my count, three
Presidents of the United States, two Vice Presidents,
generals, the security chiefs in the US are all saying,
“This is a debate that, in retrospect, we know that we
had to have”. There are Members of the House of
Lords, people who have been charged with oversight
of security measures here—the former chairman of the
ISC, Tom King, said that this was a debate that had
to be had and they had to review the laws. The
Director of National Intelligence in the US said these
were conversations that needed to happen. In terms of
the public interest, I do not think anyone is seriously
questioning that this leaps over the hurdles of public
interest.

Q258 Michael Ellis: Mr Rusbridger, you authorised
files stolen by Snowden that contained the names of
intelligence staff to be communicated elsewhere,
didn’t you? Yes or no?

Alan Rusbridger: I think I have already dealt with
that. It was never—

Michael Ellis: Could you just answer my question?
Alan Rusbridger: I think it has been known for six
months that these documents contained names and I
shared them with The New York Times.

Q259 Michael Ellis: Do you accept from me that that
is a criminal offence under section 58A of the
Terrorism Act 2000?

Alan Rusbridger: You may be a lawyer, Mr Ellis; I
am not, so I will leave that to you.

Q260 Michael Ellis:	50,000 plus files were

communicated by you as editor-in-chief of The
Guardian. You caused them to be communicated and
they contained a wealth of information. It was
effectively an IT-sharing platform between the United
States and the United Kingdom intelligence services,
wasn’t it?

Alan Rusbridger: I will leave you to express those
words. They are not my words.

Michael Ellis: You decline to answer that. Very well.
But that was information that contained a wealth of
data, protected data that was both secret and even top
secret under the protective classifications of this
country.

Alan Rusbridger: They were secret documents.

Q261 Michael Ellis:	Secret and top secret

documents. Do you accept that that information
contained personal information that could lead to the
identity, even the sexual orientation, of persons
working within GCHQ?

Alan Rusbridger: The sexual orientation thing is
completely new to me. If you can explain how we
have done that then I would be interested.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 35

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

Q262 Michael Ellis: In part from your own
newspaper on 2 August, which is still available online,
because you refer to the fact that GCHQ has its own
pride group for staff. I suggest to you that the data
contained within the 58,000 documents also contained
data that allowed your newspaper to report that
information. Therefore, it is now information that is
no longer protected under the laws of this country and
it jeopardises those individuals, does it not?

Alan Rusbridger: You have completely lost me, Mr
Ellis. There are gay members of GCHQ. Is that a
surprise and that they have a—

Michael Ellis: It is not amusing, Mr Rusbridger. They
should not be outed by you and your newspaper.

Alan Rusbridger: I don’t think it—

Michael Ellis: What about the fact that GCHQ
organised a trip—

Alan Rusbridger: Hold on a second.

Michael Ellis: Either you are going to answer the
question or you are not.

Alan Rusbridger: If you let me answer, I will answer
the question.

Chair: Mr Ellis, order. If Mr Rusbridger could have
the opportunity of answering, then please do go on.
Mr Rusbridger.

Alan Rusbridger: On the mention of the existence of
a pride group within GCHQ, if you go to the
Stonewall website you can find the same information
there. I fail to see how that outs a single member of
the GCHQ.

Q263 Michael Ellis: You said it was news to you.
You know about the Stonewall website, so it is not
news to you. It was in your newspaper. What about
the fact that GCHQ organised trips to Disneyland and
Paris? That has also been printed in your newspaper.
Does that mean, if you knew that, that information
including the family details of members of GCHQ is
also within the 58,000 documents, the security of
which you have seriously jeopardised?

Alan Rusbridger: Again, your references are lost to
me. The fact that there was a family outing from
GCHQ to Disneyland—

Michael Ellis: Do you accept that these files contain
methods of trapping cyber-criminals like paedophiles
and hackers?

Alan Rusbridger: The only story that has been
identified to us that resembles that description is the
story about Tor and I would welcome the opportunity
to talk about that.

Q264 Michael Ellis: No, I would rather you didn’t. I
do not see any need to further publicise that
information. What about the location of safe houses
and other safe locations, secret locations; 58,000
documents that contain that information?

Alan Rusbridger: If you don’t mind me just referring
to Tor, because we are in danger of having a rather
analogue discussion about the digital age, the point
about Tor is that anybody who is interested in this
would have learnt nothing from The Guardian that is
not available on the Tor’s own website, so let us get
real about this. There is nothing The Guardian
published that is endangering people in the way that
you talk about that is not there already.

Q265 Michael Ellis: Mr Rusbridger, it is not only
about what you have published. It is about what you
have communicated. That is what amounts or can
amount to a criminal offence. You have caused the
communication of secret documents. We classify
things as secret and top secret in this country for a
reason—not to hide them from The Guardian, but to
hide them from those who are out to harm us. You
have communicated those documents.

Chair: Mr Ellis, is that a question?

Michael Ellis: If you had known about the Enigma
Code during World War II would you have transmitted
that information to the Nazis?

Alan Rusbridger: That is a well-worn red herring, if
you don’t mind me saying so, Mr Ellis. I think most
journalists can make a distinction between the kind of
thing that you are talking about and the Enigma Code
or the travel or the troop ships. This is very well-worn
material that has been dealt with by the Supreme
Court and that you learn when you do your NCTJ
course. I can make those distinctions, Mr Ellis, thank
you.

Q266 Michael Ellis: Have members of the board of
The Guardian newspaper conceded to you that the law
may have been broken in this matter?

Alan Rusbridger: No.

Q267 Michael Ellis: Have you been told by members
of the board of The Guardian newspaper that your job
is on the line connected with this matter?

Alan Rusbridger: I think you are under some
misapprehension, Mr Ellis.

Michael Ellis: I am asking you a question.

Alan Rusbridger: The board of The Guardian
newspaper, if you understood the structure of The
Guardian, has no jurisdiction over the editor of The
Guardian.

Michael Ellis: Did The Guardian—

Chair: Mr Ellis, I think this needs to be your final
question.

Michael Ellis: No, I think it is less than six minutes,
Mr Vaz.

Chair: Mr Ellis, order.

Michael Ellis: I am coming to a conclusion.

Chair: Mr Ellis, order. I am chairing this meeting.
This is your final question.

Q268 Michael Ellis: This is not a Labour love-in, Mr
Rusbridger, and I am asking you some questions that
I think you should answer. Did The Guardian pay for
flights by David Miranda to courier secret files?

Alan Rusbridger: We paid for Mr Miranda’s flights.
He was acting as intermediary between—

Michael Ellis: You did pay for those flights? Have
they been accounted for as a business expense, those
flights? Is the UK taxpayer funding a tax break for the
transfer of stolen files?

Chair: You may not be familiar with the tax laws, so
I think we will move on to our next questioner.
Michael Ellis: I do not see why you should move on.
Chair: Order, Mr Ellis.

Q269 Mr Winnick: Perhaps you are fortunate not to
be in a Moscow courtroom in the 1930s, Mr

Ev 36 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

Rusbridger, with Mr Vechinski asking you questions.
Were you surprised at the amount of intelligence
gathering that was revealed as a result of what
Snowden gave to your newspaper and other media
outlets?

Alan Rusbridger: I think many people are staggered
by the amount of—

Mr Winnick: You, yourself, if I may interrupt. Were
you staggered and surprised?

Alan Rusbridger: I was staggered. I think we all knew
that the intelligence agencies collected a lot of data
and people are still trying to make out as though
nothing has changed in the last 15 years since the laws
were passed. We have a lot of analogue laws that deal
with the digital world. I think the last serious law that
was passed about any of this material was 2000,
which was at a time when Facebook had not been
invented and when Google was still doing its initial
funding round, and we’re pretending that the laws that
covered crocodile clips on copper wires are
stretchable to deal with the collection of maybe 3
billion phone events and the meta data around those
a day. Yes, I think there is a staggering amount of
information being collected, which has surprised even
those who passed the laws that apparently, I say,
authorised the collection.

Q270 Mr Winnick: Would it be right to say that
since the reports have occurred, while some senior
American politicians in Congress denounce, as one
would expect, Snowden as a traitor, others have
expressed surprise that their own country has been
involved in such intelligence-gathering on the sort of
extensive scale as Snowden has revealed?

Alan Rusbridger: The people who are most disturbed
by the revelations include the people who pass the
laws that are being used to justify it. Senator
Sensenbrenner, who is a right-wing Republican who
drafted and passed the Patriot Act, was the first person
out of the stocks to say that he was appalled that the
Patriot Act that he drafted was being used to justify
what he regarded as un-American, to come to your
question, Mr Chairman, about patriotism. He was
appalled. He said, “This is not what I intended by
the Patriot Act”, and there are currently three Bills in
Congress that are being proposed to limit—

Mr Winnick: Arising from Snowden?

Alan Rusbridger: Arising from Snowden and arising
from Snowden through newspapers and through our
publication, which are being used—and these are
cross-party Bills—to limit what is going on. You are
quite right to say that people have been extremely
surprised at what has been going on and in Congress,
at least, there is meaningful oversight where people
are now trying to place some limits on what has been
going on.

Q271 Mr Winnick: Coming to our own country,
would you say that it has changed the course of
debate, whether the oversight is sufficient; the subject,
of course, of the recent public session of the
Intelligence and Security Committee? I am sure we
were all impressed by the robust questioning that took
place there at the time, but do you feel that it has
changed the course of this particular debate how far

Parliament is inadequate at this stage to deal with such
a vast amount of intelligence-gathering involving
many, many people who are not public figures?

Alan Rusbridger: I think it has absolutely impacted
on that debate. I think there are many parliamentarians
who are anxious, for instance, about what they were
told during the passage of the Data Communications
Bill and the so-called capability gap and were rather
appalled to learn that stuff that they were being asked
to pass was already being done and that this
information was not shared with them at the time. I
think it comes to the heart of parliamentary oversight
and whether what is done in the name of
parliamentary oversight is remotely adequate at the
moment or whether it is well-resourced enough or
whether they have the technological expertise.

I would like to quote one little section because we
have now spent about 10 minutes in this Committee
discussing leaks that did not happen. The catastrophic
leak that did happen was dealt with by the ISC with
the following exchange, “Chairman: Can we assume
you are having discussions with your American
colleagues about the hundreds of thousands of people
who appear to have access to your information? Head
of MI5: All three of us are involved in those
discussions, Chairman. Chair: Thank you very much.”
That is the only question that has been asked in
Parliament about the loss of 58,000 documents
through a data-sharing scheme between GCHQ and
NSA. If that amounts to oversight, the budget for
oversight, even now, is £1.3 million, supposedly a
secret incidentally, which is about a third of the
amount that Cheltenham Borough Council spends on
car-parks.

Q272 Mr Winnick: The Prime Minister in the
Chamber said that he wants to reach agreement, or
words to that effect, with The Guardian but if The
Guardian is not willing to see the point of view of the
authorities then, with reluctance, other measures may
be taken. Presumably, he is referring to DA-Notices
and the rest. How far do you feel there is a threat to
the newspaper if you continue to publish revelations
from Snowden? Do you feel under pressure?

Alan Rusbridger: Things have happened in this
country that would be inconceivable in parts of
Europe or in America. They include prior restraint.
They include a senior Whitehall official going to see
an editor to say, “There has been enough debate now”.
They include asking for the destruction of our discs.
They include MPs calling for the police to prosecute
an editor. There are things that are inconceivable in
America under the First Amendment.

Q273 Mr Winnick:	Are you under pressure

yourself? Do you feel this pressure from the
Government?

Alan Rusbridger: I feel that some of this activity has
been designed to intimidate The Guardian, yes.

Q274 Chair: Thank you. We must move on but,
before we do, are you telling this Committee that, as
a result of Parliament’s failure to oversee the security
services and the failure to have the necessary expertise
and the failure to have a sufficient budget, that is why

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 37

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

you were obliged to publish because, had you not
done so, nobody would have found out about this?
Alan Rusbridger: The only way any of this
information has come into the public domain is
through the press.

Q275 Chair: We should look at our structures better?
Alan Rusbridger: We should and America is. Senator
Dianne Feinstein, who is the Malcolm Rifkind
equivalent in America and who had been supporting
the NSA for about three months—the Merkel
telephone call happens, they did not know about
that—said at that point, “It is abundantly clear that a
total review of all intelligence programmes is
necessary”. That was the oversight committee saying,
“We had no idea what was going on”, and that must
be true of our own—

Chair: I am sorry. In respect of our inquiry, you think
that it would be good if this Committee looked at the
structures of oversight as part of the counter-
terrorism structure?

Alan Rusbridger: Absolutely. I think that would have
been important to you.

Q276 Mark Reckless: You wrote in your letter of 7
November to Julian Smith that The Guardian had not
published the names or identifying information for
staff of our intelligence agencies and I think in reply
to the Chair earlier you added that you had not used
or lost control of that information.

Alan Rusbridger: Yes.

Mark Reckless: Can I clarify, though? In your
response to Michael Ellis earlier did you say that you
had communicated that information to The New York
Times?

Alan Rusbridger: At the danger of repeating myself,
we gave the material to The New York Times at
roughly the same time as we told the Cabinet
Secretary that we were doing that and gave the
Cabinet Secretary the name of the editor of The New
York Times and how to contact her.

Q277 Mark Reckless: You referred earlier to
material given to The Washington Post not being
under your control. Did the material shared with The
New York Times remain under your control?

Alan Rusbridger: Yes. The material was given to The
Washington Post by Edward Snowden himself via a
journalist called Barton Gellman. The material that we
had with The New York Times is in the joint control
of me and the editor of The New York Times.

Q278 Mark Reckless: When you say you had not
lost control of the relevant data at any time, does that
include the periods when the data was with FedEx,
who I understand you have admitted to using to
transfer some of that information?

Alan Rusbridger: Yes. No data was lost or we lost
control of no data. No names have leaked from The
Guardian.

Q279 Mark Reckless: I have previously used FedEx.
I would not naturally refer to the period while
whatever I was sending was with FedEx as being a

period that it was under my control. Is that what you
are saying?

Alan Rusbridger: I am saying we have not lost
control of it. The reporting of the FedEx transmission
was grossly exaggerated. It was reported as tens of
thousands of documents including MI5 and MI6 spies.
That was not the case. It was a small amount of
material relating to one story that was encrypted to
military-trade encryption. It was sent safely, arrived
safely and did not involve any loss of control.

Q280 Mark Reckless: You referred earlier to the
information having commenced with The Guardian,
The Washington Post, Rio, by which I assume you
mean Glenn Greenwald, and Germany. Are you
saying that all 53,000 files began with each of those
four places?

Alan Rusbridger: Can you repeat the question?

Mark Reckless:	Before you said Guardian,

Washington Post, Rio—I assume Glenn Greenwald—
and Germany. You were saying that the data
information had started in each of those four places.
Are you saying that all of the 53,000 files had started
in each of those places?

Alan Rusbridger: I don’t think we know exactly who
has what. Probably the only person who knows that is
Edward Snowden.

Q281 Mark Reckless: Was there any information
that you had at The Guardian but that Glenn
Greenwald did not until you transferred it to him?
Alan Rusbridger: I don’t know the exact answer to
that because I don’t know who got what in the initial
handing out.

Q282 Mark Reckless: Why would The Guardian
have bothered to transfer information to Glenn
Greenwald if he already had it?

Alan Rusbridger: I do not want to get too drawn into
the methodology of how we have worked, but—
Mark Reckless: It is an issue, though, of whether you
have communicated this information outside your
jurisdiction.

Alan Rusbridger: I cannot be entirely sure what Mr
Greenwald had separately from us; what is encrypted
in different ways; what is held in what way; what he
has that Laura Poitras does or does not have. I have
seen him on the public record say that he and Laura
Poitras are the only people who have complete sets,
but I do not know that to be true.

Q283 Mark Reckless: Has he not said on the public
record that some files relating to GCHQ that The
Guardian shared with The New York Times were a set
of documents that only The Guardian had until you
did that?

Alan Rusbridger: I don’t want to repeat myself too
much. I know that Mr Greenwald has GCHQ material
that was given to him directly from Mr Snowden, so
I can’t tell you exactly what we gave him that he did
not have already.

Q284 Mark Reckless: I understand if you choose not
to answer this question, but do you consider that you
have communicated information on the identities of

Ev 38 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

staff of the intelligence agencies out of jurisdiction
contrary to section 58A of the Terrorism Act?

Alan Rusbridger: I think I have answered that to the
Chairman.

Mark Reckless: Your answer was not clear, at least
not to me.

Alan Rusbridger: I will try to repeat myself clearly. I
think it has been apparent to the Government for many
months that the material that Mr Snowden leaked
included a good many documents that had names of
security people working for both the NSA and GCHQ.
As I said and I will say it again, I told the Cabinet
Secretary in mid-July that we were sharing this with
The New York Times.

Mark Reckless: Which you would accept constitutes
communicating it outside of the UK jurisdiction.

Alan Rusbridger: Self-evidently they work in New
York, yes. I have bought this book along with me
today. Some of you will be familiar with this. People
will remember, in the mid-1980s, the Cabinet
Secretary travelling to Australia to try to suppress this
book that was written by a former MI5 agent and we
had the ridiculous sight of a British Cabinet Secretary
trying to stop the publication of something that had
already been published in Australia. What was very
much in my mind was the ridiculous situation that we
would be in if The Guardian was the only publication
in the world that was not able to publish material that
was being published in Rio or Germany or around
the world.

Q285 Mark Reckless: You have, I think, Mr
Rusbridger, admitted a criminal offence in your
response just then. Do you consider that it would not
be in the public interest for the CPS to prosecute you
or should that be dealt with in the authorities in the
normal way?

Alan Rusbridger: I think it depends on your view of
free press. In America Attorney General Eric Holder
came out within the last two weeks and said that, on
what he had seen so far, he had no intention of
prosecuting Glenn Greenwald. He has gone further.
He said that under his watch as Attorney General of
the US he will not prosecute any journalist doing their
duty journalistically. In New York within the last
month I debated with the former general counsel of
the NSA, Stewart Baker, and he makes absolutely the
distinction between what Snowden did and what
journalists did. He said, “Once the information is in
the hands of the journalists that is protected material,”
and my reading of our own DPP and the guidelines
that he laid down during the Leveson process is that
public interest will weigh very carefully and very
highly in any deliberations he takes.

Q286 Mark Reckless: Did Glenn Greenwald not
also make a distinction between journalism, including
what he was, according to him, engaged in and what
he says The Guardian was doing, which was the
distributing or indeed trafficking across international
borders that information?

Alan Rusbridger: We were sharing this information
with journalistic colleagues on The New York Times
in order to stimulate a debate which presidents and
legislatures around the world think vital.

Q287 Chair: Just to clarify, is there a current police
investigation into The Guardian?

Alan Rusbridger: I don’t know.

Chair: Nobody has communicating with you or
interviewed you or asked you any questions about this
from the Metropolitan Police?

Alan Rusbridger: I have seen Scotland Yard say that
they are holding an investigation into the matters
generally. No one has told us whether that includes
The Guardian or not.

Chair: For your records and for public record, the
Committee has decided to call Andrew Parker, the
head of MI5, in open session next year.

Q288 Paul Flynn: Did you have advance notice of
the questions we are asking you today?

Mr Winnick: Including yours.

Alan Rusbridger: I was not. I was told the general
areas of concern that might be covered.

Q289 Paul Flynn: Were you stunned at having an
open meeting of the Intelligence and Security
Committee with their carefully manicured questions
and rehearsed answers, a Committee that is accused
of being a poodle to many Governments, including
being cheerleaders for the Iraq war? Do you think this
raises the question that the scrutiny provided by that
Committee is inadequate and we need a reform?

Alan Rusbridger: As I said, I think lots of people,
including former chairs of the ISC, have said that we
need to re-look at the oversight, and Sir Malcolm
Rifkind has himself said that he wants to look into his
own Committee. I hope this will be an opportunity for
people to talk about how oversight could be approved,
because I think there is no question that it should be.

Q290 Paul Flynn:	The United Kingdom

Government’s reaction to this has been very different
from any other Government and Frank La Rue, the
United Nations Special Rapporteur, has said the UK
Government’s response is “unacceptable in a
democratic society”, and The New York Times said,
“The UK Government is challenging the idea of a free
inquisitive press”. Isn’t that true?

Alan Rusbridger: I think what has been going on in
the United Kingdom in the last six months has
dismayed many people who care about free speech or
free press and that includes NGOs. It includes at least
two UN Special Rapporteurs. It includes people in
Europe and many editors around the world.

Q291 Paul Flynn: Does the fact that a 29-year-old
Hawaiian and 850,000 other people had access to the
information suggest that our potential enemies have
access to it, too?

Alan Rusbridger: It is in the witness statement of
Oliver Robbins, the Deputy National Security
Advisor, that they have been working on that
assumption since Snowden disappeared with the
material.

Q292 Paul Flynn: Were you shocked by the
revelations of the intense surveillance of allies by this
country in a place like the G-20 and so on?

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 39

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

Alan Rusbridger: Again, there is the question of the
public interest; the fact that President Obama
effectively had to concede that his country had been
bugging President Merkel. There has been no denial
from Australia that they were intercepting the phone
calls of the President of Indonesia and his wife. That
was the thing that led Senator Feinstein to say that
she had to review all the activities of the intelligence
services because, clearly, this was going on without
knowledge. You will remember that the United States
came out and said, “Okay, we will stop bugging these
gatherings of the IMF”, or the World Bank or the
European Parliament or all these things that they had
been bugging. We do not know, but there were some
specific organisations of allies devoted not to
espionage or to hostilities but to bridge building and
peace making; a lot of institutions set up after the
World War II and the United States has come out and
said, “We won’t be bugging them anymore”, which to
me is an implicit admission that they were.

Q293 Paul Flynn: Do you think that the reaction of
Government was less to do with security and more
to do with the fact that we have traditionally been
neurotically secretive?

Alan Rusbridger: Funnily enough, the DA-Notice
Committee that we have been talking about earlier
have just published their minutes of their last meeting
in November. That is a meeting of the press side and
the official side, and the vice chairman of that body
said it was important to distinguish between
embarrassment and genuine concerns for national
security. The vice chairman felt that much of the
material published by The Guardian fell into the
former category. A lot of this stuff is embarrassing
because it has come into the public domain rather than
threatening national security.

Q294 Paul Flynn: Would you agree that you have
performed a very important public service for
legislatures and for everyone else? A difficult question
I know.

Alan Rusbridger: There is no doubt in my mind. I
will say this again and it is not blowing my own
trumpet—

Paul Flynn: Please do.

Alan Rusbridger: Well, it is not done in that spirit;
this has been a coalition of newspapers, including
newspapers in Europe. If the President of United
States calls a review of everything to do with
intelligence and that information only came into the
public domain through newspaper then it is self-
evident, is it not, that newspapers had done something
that oversight failed to do? I would say that was true
of this country and of the United States.

Q295 Nicola Blackwood: Mr Rusbridger, I am
interested to understand how, as an editor, when you
come into possession of documents of this nature that
clearly indicate a big story for you but also contain
very sensitive, national security material, you go about
judging what you can publish and what you can’t
publish.

Alan Rusbridger: I don’t know of an editor in the
world who does not agonise about these kinds of

decisions in the way that you would expect. We
touched on it earlier. We are all patriots and we all
care about security.

Q296 Nicola Blackwood: To be more specific, how
in this case did you go about it in terms of the
specific process?

Alan Rusbridger: I discussed this with colleagues
who are some of the most experienced colleagues in
Fleet Street in terms of dealing with this kind of
material. It is important to know that in the last six
months there have been more than 100 contacts with
the official side of things. In America that has been
with the White House, with the Director of National
Intelligence, with the FBI, with the NSA, with the
National Security Council and with the Pentagon. In
this country it has included Downing Street, the
Cabinet Office, the National Security Advisor, GCHQ
themselves and the DA-Notice Committee. We have
consulted on more than 100 times with the agencies
in order to be aware of their concerns before we
publish material.

Q297 Nicola Blackwood: I suppose my question is,
have you gone through all the 53,000 documents and
have some been specifically excluded from
publication and will they not be appearing? Have
others been put under “Yes, okay for publication”?
Alan Rusbridger: In terms of publishing documents,
I think we have published 26.

Nicola Blackwood: Yes, but I am more thinking about
the ones that have not yet been.

Alan Rusbridger: We have published a few individual
pages from documents that have been redacted. I
would not be expecting us to be publishing a huge
amount more. With 26 over six months, I would say
it has been a trickle.

Q298 Nicola Blackwood: What about the ones that
have been communicating to the United States? I
understand in some of those the names have been
redacted and some of them have not. How did you go
about deciding which names to redact and which ones
not to?

Alan Rusbridger: Let us be completely clear about
this. The Guardian has not used any names. On the
rare occasion where we have used individual slides
from documents that had names on, we absolutely
redacted those. It has been said that The Guardian
used names. We did not use names.

Chair: Mr Rusbridger, you made it clear that no
names have been used.

Alan Rusbridger: Yes, but nevertheless it—

Q299 Nicola Blackwood: Yes, but that is not the

question that I asked here. Where you communicated
the documents to the United States, and in some cases
in those documents you did redact the names and in
other cases you did not, how did you decide?

Alan Rusbridger: No, you are wrong. I am sorry.
Nicola Blackwood: I am sorry. I thought that was
the case.

Alan Rusbridger: No, we have not used—

Nicola Blackwood: You have not redacted any
names?

Ev 40 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

Alan Rusbridger: We have not used any names. We
have redacted—

Nicola Blackwood: No, but where you have
communicated the documents to other papers that
you—

Alan Rusbridger: I see, before transmission?

Nicola Blackwood: Yes.

Alan Rusbridger: Yes, you are quite right.

Q300 Chair: Sorry, what is she right about? I am
confused. Is she right that you sent the names or you
redacted the names?

Alan Rusbridger: At the risk of repeating myself,
there were names in these documents. The
Government has been aware of that. Those documents
were shared with The New York Times.

Q301 Nicola Blackwood: Did you redact any of
those names before sending them?

Alan Rusbridger: Not before they were sent.

Nicola Blackwood: You just sent the names as they
were out of the country?

Alan Rusbridger: The New York Times has not used
any names either.

Q302 Nicola Blackwood:	Did you have an

agreement before you sent the documents that they
would not be used?

Alan Rusbridger: We did.

Nicola Blackwood: You did. What about with The
Washington Post?

Alan Rusbridger: The Washington Post was leaked
material directly by Edward Snowden.

Nicola Blackwood: Okay. But you are working with
them, I understand.

Alan Rusbridger: We are not working with The
Washington Post.

Nicola Blackwood: You are not working with them
at all, no.

Alan Rusbridger: The only other body we are
working with in America is ProPublica. The chief of
ProPublica is a man called Paul Steiger who has 16
Pulitzer Prizes to his name and is extremely
experienced in handling this kind of material.

Q303 Nicola Blackwood: Did you send documents
to him?

Alan Rusbridger: That was the material I referred to
earlier; one story, a small number of documents.
Again, it is open knowledge. I gave the Cabinet
Secretary his name, too, in mid-July.

Q304 Mark Reckless: Can I ask why you didn’t
redact those names before showing them to The New
York Times?

Alan Rusbridger: There were 58,000 documents, Mr
Reckless.

Q305 Mark Reckless: The public interest defence is
not actually the journalism but that you did not have
the time or did not want to spend the resources going
through them before showing them to The New York
Times?

Alan Rusbridger: There were conversations with the
Cabinet Secretary that led me to think that it was wise
to share this material.

Q306 Chair: How many people were at the secret
ceremony, attended by yourself and others, that took
place in your basement?

Alan Rusbridger: There were two from the GCHQ
side and I think two or three from The Guardian.

Q307 Chair: You just broke up the hard discs and
the laptops. Is that right? Is that what everyone was
doing?

Alan Rusbridger: Yes. It is harder to smash up a
computer than you might think. I believe they have
things like food mixers into which you can drop the
computer, which reduces them to dust.

Q308 Chair: So the food mixer was brought to the
basement of The Guardian and you popped things in?
Alan Rusbridger: No, we did it with Black &
Deckers.

Q309 Chair: Was there any point in that exercise if
you had the documents anyway and you were going
to publish them, the food mixer thing?

Alan Rusbridger: The serious point is, and it goes
back to Spycatcher, that I was completely clear with
the Cabinet Secretary that there were copies elsewhere
and that the destruction of these computers was not
going to stop reporting. I think—

Chair: But they still went ahead and brought the food
mixer and you still had the ceremony?

Alan Rusbridger: We did it with our Black &
Deckers, but to their instructions. I accept this was a
hard choice for the Government. I think they were
balancing a free press with security. I understand the
nature of the choice, but the point was that I think the
alternative to having the newspapers—and you can
criminalise newspapers all you like and try to take
them out of this—the next leak or the next Edward
Snowden or the next Chelsea Manning will not go to
newspapers. They will dump the stuff on the internet.

Q310 Chair: Yes, we understand that is a wider
point, but on the ceremony it was just a public
relations exercise in the end?

Alan Rusbridger: I would not say that, but I would
say if their aim was to stop publication and to have a
dialogue of the sort that we were having—and Mr
Robbins’ witness statement makes apparent the reason
they did not go for an injunction was because they
felt that we were behaving responsibility—they lost
control of the documents the moment they destroyed
them in London.

Q311 Yasmin Qureshi: From what you have said
this afternoon, is it the case that you say that what the
newspaper published would not have caused any harm
to any intelligence personnel nor put to risk any
intelligence operation dealing with security issues?
Alan Rusbridger: I don’t know because no one has
come to me and said, “This is the specific harm that
you have done”. I have seen lots of people who have
dealt with the security agencies. I have seen the

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 41

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

former Lord Chancellor. I have seen former Home
Office Ministers and former Foreign Office Ministers,
Paddy Ashdown, who was a former Royal Marine. I
have seen people who are serious figures who have
dealt with the agencies who say that one should
always treat the claims of national security with
proper scepticism. I think that is a proper thing. The
only story that any Member of Parliament has directly
referred to is the story about the Tor, the so-called
deep internet, which I am very happy to talk about if
anybody is interested.

Q312 Yasmin Qureshi: Ben Emmerson, Queen’s
Counsel, who is the UN Special Rapporteur in
counter-terrorism, has just announced they are going
to be looking into this whole issue about intelligence-
gathering or information-gathering by the US and the
UK. I am just going to summarise what he said. He
said it is the role of the free press to hold a
Government to account and some of the suggestions
from the Tory MPs that The Guardian should face
criminal investigation are outrageous and even some
of the tabloid newspapers are joining that. Are you
welcoming the UN investigation into the whole issue
of gathering information and the extent of it?

Alan Rusbridger: Absolutely. I think we have just had
a long and tortured debate about Leveson and during
that debate we heard repeated assurances from all
three party leaders that politicians would not interfere
in the press. It seems to me at the very first hurdle
Parliament is in danger of falling in that. As I quoted
earlier, the general counsel of the NSA—so this is not
necessarily a friend of journalists, he is a full-time
securocrat—said, “Of course, we did not want this
stuff in the public and I perfectly understand why
intelligence agencies want to keep all this stuff
secret”. But once it is in the public domain and once
it is in the hands of the press, the NSA guy says, “The
press must be protected”, and that is a wonderful thing
about America and I think it is a lesson that we are
still learning in this country.

Q313 Yasmin Qureshi: My final question relates to
the fact that there have been articles published in your
newspaper and, I think, others have expressed at
times—and I know the Chair has alluded to this—
about the fact there is a question about the extent of
parliamentary oversight of the working of the security
agencies. I know in the end Parliament will make its
own decision, but do you have some suggestions as to
a possible way that Parliament can in fact improve
or have more oversight of what the security agencies
are doing?

Alan Rusbridger: I think somebody has to hold the
ring between these conflicting debates. We are not
talking about one public interest here. Security is
obviously a very great public interest. No one is
contradicting that. There is a public interest in privacy
and there is public interest in the economic health of
tech companies, the economic basis of the digital
economy in this country. I have seen a figure of £36
billion as the likely damage to US and UK companies
because people are not going to trust these companies
on the basis of some of the stories that have come into
the domain.

I think you need a privacy advocate. You need
somebody external who has the technical knowledge,
which I doubt many of the members of that committee
have. They have a small budget of £1.3 million. I
think there are all kinds of questions that
parliamentarians have started asking: whether it is
right for this not to be a full select committee of the
House, whether it is right that the Chair should be a
person who has had dealings with intelligence
committees and responsibility for them, whether they
have enough resource and so on. I am hearing very
helpful suggestions and very interesting suggestions
about how the ISC might be reformed as a result of
newspaper coverage.

Q314 Ian Austin: What is point of principle? It is
obvious, is it not, that all Governments are going to
gather intelligence and all Governments are going to
keep that information secret? Why should I accept
from you that you are better placed to judge what bits
of that information should become public? Why are
you better placed to be able to be able to judge that
than the heads of the security services who say Al
Qaeda is having a field day and this has helped
Britain’s enemies?

Alan Rusbridger: I am not claiming to be better
placed than the heads of the security agencies. I am
just saying there is a broader debate than just security
and the democracy that I want to live in—

Ian Austin: I accept that.

Alan Rusbridger: I don’t want the national security
to be used as a trump card that says, “I am sorry, you
can’t publish anything else because national security
is going to trump that”.

Q315 Ian Austin: I am not suggesting that. What I
want to know is when the people who are experts in
this, dealing with it all the time, serving the country
and trying to protect us all, say that this is stuff that
should not be in the public domain, how can you
argue that you and the colleagues at The Guardian
that you consulted are better able to make a judgment
on that? Obviously you do because you went ahead
and published it.

Alan Rusbridger: Let us talk about the Tor story. Tor,
for members of the Committee who are not familiar
with this, is a system of communicating in encrypted
form. It was built by the US Navy. It is funded to this
day by the State Department. Why is it funded by the
State Department? It is funded so that dissidents in
horrible countries can communicate safely. That is a
good thing, isn’t it? It is also used by paedophiles.
That is a bad thing.

If we publish a story after talking to the White House
for three weeks to say that this is a network that still
seems to be safe to use, is that a good thing or a
bad thing? It is bad for dissidents and it is good for
paedophiles. We use our judgment and, to come back
to the earlier question, there was nothing The
Guardian published that is not on Tor’s own website.

Q316 Ian Austin: Yes, but I think there are two
separate things here. It is one thing to report on the
extent of surveillance and to say this information is
being gathered and to report the facts that this is

Ev 42 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

happening. That is one thing. I think it is something
very different to then transmit the information in a
risky way, in an insecure way, which could put at risk
security personnel. Those are two very different
things, aren’t they? I am not worried if the Americans
are embarrassed. Reporting the extent of surveillance
is fine, but I think the transmission of information and
the way you managed it is something very different.
Alan Rusbridger: I took you question to be the
judgment of editors versus the judgment of security
services, but you are making a different point now.
Ian Austin: It is a separate question, yes.

Alan Rusbridger: We can talk endlessly about how
the material was held. The only time the material has
leaked has been from the NSA, not from The
Guardian.

Ian Austin: No, I understand that.

Alan Rusbridger: You understand that point.

Q317 Ian Austin: Why were some of the names
redacted? I am not clear why some of the names and
some of the information that was sent was redacted
and some of it was not. Is it because you did not know
what was in all of the 58,000 files before they were
sent?

Alan Rusbridger:	The redaction was of any

documents that we published that might have had a
name on it. We have not used any names. In redaction
I am talking about published material.

Q318 Ian Austin: Stuff that was just transmitted as
it was?

Alan Rusbridger: We did some cleaning up, but we
did not clean up every one of the 58,000 documents.

Q319 Ian Austin: What proportion of the 58,000
documents were read before they were sent to other
people?

Alan Rusbridger: I could not tell you. I don’t know.

Q320 Ian Austin: You don’t know what was
transmitted do you? The guy Miranda when he was
transporting this stuff had the files encrypted but he
had a bit of paper in his pocket with the passwords to
unencrypt them. That does not strike me, as Ollie
Robbins said, as being the best way of looking after
secure information.

Alan Rusbridger: That is not—

Ian Austin: I think that is a matter of legitimate
concern.

Alan Rusbridger: What you say is factually not
quite right.

Ian Austin: That is what Ollie Robbins told the
Telegraph.

Alan Rusbridger: If you read his witness statement—
Ian Austin: I have it here.

Alan Rusbridger:—it is not quite right. What he talks
about is the password to one file, which was a kind of
index to other files. If you read Mr Robbins’ witness
statement, which was made 11 days after the material
was seized, it is apparent that the encryption on the
files themselves have not been broken by GCHQ’s
finest. There is a supplementary witness statement
given some time later in which the case they make for

retaining the files is that the police could not break
the kind of encryption that was being used.

Q321 Ian Austin: Was any of the information taken
home from the Guardian by any of your staff?

Alan Rusbridger: No.

Q322 Ian Austin:	In the documentary about

WikiLeaks, James Ball says that he took a copy of the
encrypted documents back home to his flat, but in this
case you are absolutely certain that that did not
happen?

Alan Rusbridger: Yes. We were not blind to the
sensitivity of this material and we went to more
precautions over this material than any other story we
have ever handled and this was not being carried
around in that way.

Q323 Ian Austin: Just one point of clarification. In
the early questions you were asked about the DA-
Notices and you said that there was one story that did
not follow that process. Was that the Tor story or was
that something else?

Alan Rusbridger: The one in relation to DA-Notices?
No, that was a story that I think falls into the category
of political embarrassment rather than national
security. It was about the bugging of leaders at the G-
20 meeting in London.

Q324 Chair: In your Orwell lecture in November
2011 you set out a number of criteria, five Rusbridger
tests, that journalists must follow if they are going to
be involved in intrusive behaviour. Indeed, The
Guardian has been commended by this Committee
and others for the work you did on phone hacking. Do
you think that what you have done meets those five
tests in regard to sufficient cause, the integrity of
motive, the methods used, that there is proper
authority and that there is a reasonable prospect of
success? Have they met those tests?

Alan Rusbridger: Yes, we were discussing that this
week. I think they are very good tests.

Chair: They are yours.

Alan Rusbridger: It is harm versus good. It is
authority. It is proportionality: 1%, not all of it. It is
not fishing expeditions. One of the things I said to the
reporters right at the beginning of this is, “We are not
going to use this as a bran tub for stories. There is
stuff in there about Iraq and Afghanistan. We are not
even going to look at it”. That is not what Edward
Snowden was doing when he wanted responsible
journalists to go through this material. I believe we
have abided by those five tests.

Q325 Chair: Are you in touch personally with Mr
Snowden?

Alan Rusbridger: I am not.

Chair: You are not, but somebody else is on your
behalf?

Alan Rusbridger: Not since Mr Greenwald left The
Guardian. We have no contact with him.

Chair: Can I say to colleagues who have indicated
they wish to ask a further question that I am going
to ask you to ask only one question? We have the
Commissioner coming in. I would like Mr Rusbridger

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 43

3 December 2013 Alan Rusbridger

to go before he arrives not for any reason other—I
don’t suspect anything is going to happen—than that
we have another session on counter-terrorism.

Q326 Dr Huppert: There are many interesting things
but I would be grateful for any advice you can give
us on how we can resolve this fundamental problem
that the security services will tend to say, “Trust us,
this is a problem but we can’t prove it to you”, and
there is simply no way to explore that properly. We
also have the issue that terrorism, like paedophiles, as
referred to by my colleague earlier, is clearly
something that is so heinous that you should do
anything to stop it, and this is often used to argue for
further legislation. What is the solution to this
conundrum? How can we avoid ourselves being in
this constant position where the security services will
just claim things and there is no way to establish it?
The agencies have the oversight. How can we break
that gap? What would your recommendations be?
Alan Rusbridger: As briefly as possible and this is
clearly the dilemma at the heart of it. In the real world
this is going to come back to Parliament and
Congress, all countries with security services, are
going to have to work out this question of oversight,
but those committees, it seems to me, must contain
the technological challenge and the representatives of
civil society who can represent the public interest in
things that are not purely security.

Q327 Michael Ellis: Mr Rusbridger, your journalist
James Ball said in the documentary called We Steal
Secrets that he took top secret encrypted documents
back to his flat, as Mr Austin has pointed out to you.
In an online interview, I think on BuzzFeed with
David Miranda, he said one of your staffers at The
Guardian was due to carry some stolen secret files,
got cold feet and then they were sent via FedEx. Did
you know that FedEx conditions of carriage included
at section 8(16) that that would be an unauthorised
thing to do? I think you said to Mr Reckless that you
had used FedEx. My question to you is that, bearing
all that in mind, do you not accept that you have been
at the very least woefully irresponsible with secret
information and thereby people’s lives?

Alan Rusbridger: The James Ball quote, as you know,
is about Wikileaks not about this story at all. It has
nothing to do with this story and, no, I don’t accept
your premise.

Q328 Mr Winnick: Can you clarify the situation of
where you go from here or where The Guardian goes
from here? The Prime Minister, and I don’t quote
directly, said in the House that threats have been
made, some may describe it as intimidation, use
whatever word one would like. Will The Guardian
continue to publish, despite all that, revelations from
Snowden that you consider should be in the public
domain?

Alan Rusbridger: We have been working slowly and
responsibly through this material with some of the

best journalists in the world, with 100 contacts with
Government and agency sources, so we will continue
to consult them. We are not going to be put off by
intimidation but nor are we going to behave
recklessly.

Mr Winnick: I am glad to hear that.

Q329 Paul Flynn: What question do you think this
Committee should ask the head of MI5 when he is
here, bearing in mind he likes advance notice of
questions?

Alan Rusbridger: I think the question that Mr
Huppert raised at the end is the crucial one. I have
met most of the heads of agencies and I know they
are serious people who think about these things but
equally it is apparent that some elements of the
intelligence services—I am speaking generally and
not necessarily about ours—have been a bit out of
control, literally, because they were not within the
control of people who should have known about it.
That is a dangerous state of affairs and, if it is true of
America, it is to some extent true here because of the
relationship between NSA and GCHQ. So I think the
question for the head of MI5 is the one that Mr
Huppert raised, which is what is the forum in which
this can be meaningfully overseen by people who
have an understanding of the technology, are
adequately resourced and understand the broader
questions and the broader public interests of civil
society that are engaged by these questions.

Q330 Chair: Are you quite satisfied that those who
protect our country by gathering information and
dealing with terrorist organisations like Al-Qaeda, Al-
Shabaab and other organisations have not been
undermined by what you have done, and those of us
who sleep safely in our beds at night should not feel
that they have been undermined at all by what The
Guardian has done?

Alan Rusbridger: The biggest threat is if you are
working in a situation where there are people inside
these organisations who are so troubled by what they
see and who are troubled by the relationship between
the legality of what is going on and what engineers
can now do—as President Obama said, what they can
do as opposed to what they should do. As long as you
have people among those hundreds of thousands of
people who are so troubled that they are going to leak
these massive databases in order to generate the public
debate that the President says is necessary, then you
have no security. President Clinton talked the other
day about that we are in danger of having a world
where there is no privacy and no security. That is a
bad situation for everyone, so I think there are mature
conversations to be had as a result of what has been
published.

Chair: Mr Rusbridger, thank you very much for
coming here. You have been clear and open in your
evidence. Thank you.

Ev 44 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

Examination of Witnesses

Witnesses: Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, Commissioner,
Commissioner, Metropolitan Police, gave evidence.

Q331 Chair:	Commissioner,	Assistant

Commissioner Dick, thank you very much for coming.
We thought that you were not going to be able to join
us, Ms Dick, but you are here.

Cressida Dick: I am delighted to be here.

Q332 Chair: We are also delighted.

Commissioner, could I start with a couple of issues
before we turn to the issues of counter-terrorism? Of
course, no session with any police officers is complete
without asking the Andrew Mitchell question, since it
has been so much in the fore. The last time you
appeared before us, which was in January this year,
matters had not been concluded and the reports had
not been ended. We now have a situation where one
of your officers has been charged with a criminal
offence and eight are now subject to disciplinary
proceedings. Is that factually correct?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: That is right, although one
of the officers is also charged with a criminal offence.
There is a total of eight, one of whom is charged with
a criminal offence and an issue of misconduct.

Q333 Chair: Bearing that in mind and bearing in
mind the statement that you made to Victoria
Derbyshire, which was broadcast and then picked up
by many others, do you regret saying that you were
100% behind your officers since we now are clear that
eight are subject to disciplinary proceedings? I know
hindsight is a wonderful gift that they don’t give you
when you become Commissioner, nor Members of
Parliament, but on balance, on reflection, it was the
wrong thing to say. Would you like to take this
opportunity of apologising or regretting what you
have done?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I think we had the same
conversation the last time I appeared before the
Committee. What I tried to say then is that if anything
I have said at any time has led anybody to believe that
we are not going to have a ruthless inquiry then I
apologise for that. What I tried to explain was that
at the time I made the statement circumstances were
different to how we find them now. I think I made
that statement on 21 November last year. At the time
Andrew Mitchell had resigned from his post on 19
October and he had previously apologised to the
officer for his behaviour. The Operation Alice leak
investigation into the leak of the police log published
in The Daily Telegraph was completed in October,
prior to me making that statement, and that was said
prior to the Met being made aware of the letter sent
to John Randall MP, which we were informed of about
13 December. While later, as you say, it appears
unwise, and I would not want to let anybody think that
we are doing anything other than being independent in
our investigation, at the time those were the
circumstances when I made the comment.

Q334 Chair: Bearing in mind that now we have had
three chief constables of forces, other officers and the
President of ACPO looking back, and I think everyone
wants to turn the page on this at some stage, quite

Metropolitan Police, and Cressida Dick, Assistant

quickly in some circumstances, do you want to draw
a line by basically apologising for what the Met did?
Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I don’t think I can at this
moment, only because until we have all heard the
outcome of the criminal investigation and prosecution,
and also the gross misconduct and the misconduct
charges, I think it would be unwise to say anything. I
would draw the attention of the Committee to a couple
of things I have said. One is that at the conclusion of
these proceedings, if there is a need to apologise to
Andrew Mitchell for anything that any Metropolitan
Police officer has done, I will do it. I will do it
personally if that is necessary. I am only hesitating to
make those comments until we have given a fair
chance to the criminal justice system and the
misconduct process. I have no inherent defensiveness
about making those comments at the appropriate time,
and I think there will be a need to clear the air should
there be any findings against the Met.

Q335 Chair: We have been troubled by evidence we
have received in successive evidence sessions about
the crime figures and evidence given to our sister
committee, the Public Administration Committee, that
basically the crime figures in the Met have been
fiddled. One of your officers talked about a
misrecording of between 22% and 25% for rape and
serious sexual offences and a deliberate attempt to
downgrade the figures, with the witness, Mr James
Patrick, saying that you can physically see this in the
notes. We put this to Peter Fahy and Hugh Orde but
of course this was not the Met so they left it to you,
which was very kind of them, since you are the
Commissioner.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: Quite properly.

Chair: Were you alarmed to hear that members of
your force had been, in effect, fiddling some of those
crime figures?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I was very shocked by the
allegation and therefore we will take it seriously. I had
not heard those allegations before, but what we have
said we will do as a result of that is to make a very
clear statement—which I did at the ACPO conference
and I will repeat it—that it is essential that we have
accurate and truthful crime stats. We know that they
are never fully the story. We know that probably 85%
of rapes and serious sexual offences are not reported,
so they are an incomplete story, but what is vital is
that what we have is accurate and truthful. It does not
help the victim or the police if they are inaccurate.
That is a very clear statement. In terms of what we
are going to do about that—

Q336 Chair: Just before you do that, are you really
telling me—you have been a chief constable, you have
been the Met Commissioner for two years and two
months—that no one has ever said to you in all that
time, 36 years in policing, that police officers are
misrecording figures? Is this the first time you have
ever heard this?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: That isn’t what I said.
Chair: No, but I was asking you.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 45

3 December 2013 Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe and Cressida Dick

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: Do you mind if I just
finish on the particular point about what we are doing
about that serious allegation, because it is really
important? First of all, we are investigating. Secondly,
I have asked Her Majesty’s Inspector to come and
inspect our existing systems. The HMI inspected our
systems in 2012 and found them to be competent and
reliable. We carry out our own audits internally, about
six every year, and all of them have been passed with
around 95% efficiency. You might say that is the Met
inspecting the Met. The Deputy Mayor, Stephen
Greenhalgh, has asked his own auditors to come in
and look at our figures.

Finally, and this is particularly pertinent to the sexual
offences and rape allegations, there is an issue in rape
about what is called “no crime”. I won’t bore the
Committee with all the details of that but there is one
particular thing that is important. A “no crime” is
raised where in fact it is said eventually that no crime
happened, not that there was a mistake about the type
of crime but there was no crime, that there was
consent present in a rape or whatever. That has
historically been an issue and we think that some of
the comments that this officer made to the Public
Affairs Committee relate to a period of over two years
ago when the no crime issue was around 25%. As I
sit before you, that no crime issue is around 9.75%,
so it is far lower. There are always reasons in sexual
offences for being very careful on behalf of the
suspect and the victim. So we will take that seriously.
What we are going to do is carry out a piece of
separate research by some academics to go back and
talk to women over at least the last two years where
there has been no crime to establish whether that was
true and, if it was not true, “Did any police officer
play a part in putting pressure on you or anyone to
withdraw that crime?” I think it is vital that someone
else does this rather than the police.

Q337 Chair: Can I say on behalf of the Committee
how much we welcome your decision to have this
investigated and the fact that you are treating it very
seriously, because we do believe it is very serious.
The whole basis of policing, and indeed the debates
that we have in the House of Commons and the
policies that we fashion, is having accurate figures.
We welcome that you have said to us today that you
are having an inquiry.

Turning to counter-terrorism now, we have just had
evidence from the editor of The Guardian. He does
not know if there is an investigation into The
Guardian in respect of the publication of the
documents. I don’t expect you to have listened to his
evidence because obviously you were travelling over
here. I don’t know whether you were cycling or not,
Commissioner. We will come on to cycling later with
Dr Huppert. Is there an investigation into The
Guardian? Mr Rusbridger has not had a knock on the
door yet.

Cressida Dick: Perhaps I can answer that question. As
you know, we conducted a port stop in August that
resulted in us receiving a large amount of material. We
announced later that we were investigating whether
anyone had committed any offences in relation to that
material and we subsequently clarified that to include

Official Secrets Act offences and potential offences in
relation to counter-terrorism. We are continuing with
that inquiry. We are taking it carefully. There is a lot
of very difficult material to find our way into. We will
go where the evidence takes us and we will be
proportionate and careful about every step that we
take. If people make complaints to us of other
offences by others or parties involved or apparently
involved or not involved, we will take those
complaints very seriously.

Q338 Chair:	Is there currently an ongoing

investigation?

Cressida Dick: There is an investigation ongoing into
that material, sir.

Chair: Into the material but not into any individual?
Cressida Dick: We are scoping what the material tells
us about who may have committed what offences and
we are working very closely with the Crown
Prosecution Service and others to understand that.

Q339 Chair: I am just wanting to establish it so it is
fact. Is it a scoping exercise?

Cressida Dick: No, it is an investigation but it is into
what the material tells us.

Q340 Chair: I am trying to be clear here. It is an
investigation that is scoping the material.

Cressida Dick: In effect, yes, sir.

Chair: Right. I think I am clear. Mr Reckless, are
you clear?

Q341 Mark Reckless: In a previous context it was
explained to us the difference, I thought, between a
scoping exercise and an investigation. The police
make a distinction between those two. Which of those
is this?

Cressida Dick: It appears possible, once we look at
the material, that some people may have committed
offences. We need to establish whether they have or
they haven’t. We have an investigation to discover
that, but that involves a huge amount of scoping of
the material.

Q342 Mark Reckless: Can I clarify, is it the job of
the police to investigate in this instance whether there
has been a breach of section 58A of the Terrorism
Act and, if so, the responsibility of the CPS to decide
whether a prosecution would be in the public interest?
Cressida Dick: Broadly, yes. We take a very careful
approach, as I have said, to any investigations into
counter-terrorism or into the Official Secrets Act. The
law is quite complicated, so the investigation is ours
and we will continue with that investigation but we
will and are taking advice from the Crown
Prosecution Service about the law as we go forward.

Q343 Chair: Thank you. How many people are
involved in this scoping exercise? How many officers
have you allocated?

Cressida Dick: I am afraid, sir, I am going to have to
come back to you with the precise number now.

Ev 46 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

3 December 2013 Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe and Cressida Dick

Q344 Chair: Alice is now closed, is it? There were
a number of officers, it had cost £250,000 at the end
to the Met, but Alice is now wound up.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: We can let you know but
I am pretty sure we are now down to three or four
officers who are preparing for two things, the criminal
prosecution and the misconduct hearings.

Q345 Chair: Before I call Mr Winnick on Snowden,
I would be grateful if you could pass on the
Committee’s condolences to the Chief Constable at
Police Scotland, Sir Stephen House, on the tragic
death of the officers in the helicopter crash. We all
feel very upset about it, and if you could pass that
on since you are the first uniformed officers to come
before that.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: Of course, Chair, we will
pass that on, and also to the members of the public
who were affected at the same time.

Chair: Of course, and to them.

Q346 Mr Winnick: The last remark of the Chair is
shared by all of us and we have a book that we are
signing in the Library for the tragedy that occurred
in Glasgow.

As far as Snowden is concerned, can I get the position
clear, Commissioner and Assistant Commissioner?
You are working on complaints that have been made
to you in the normal way. Am I correct?

Cressida Dick: I didn’t say that, sir. I said we are
investigating what the material tells us and whether
anybody appears to have committed any offences
from what we can see in that material. We will deal
with any other complaints that we might get in the
normal way.

Q347 Mr Winnick: What you are looking at at the
moment is not entirely as a result of complaints that
have been sent to the Met?

Cressida Dick: No, it is not.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: It might be worth just
reminding you about the chronology of what
happened. Mr Miranda was passing through Heathrow
airport, was stopped on a schedule 7 stop, was
detained under that stop and material was seized. That
material has now been the subject of a judicial review
to see whether or not the police appropriately stopped
him and whether we appropriately seized that
material. The judicial review has now reserved its
opinion and we await the outcome of that. It is under
the information that was seized at that stop that we
have tried to answer the questions as best we can at
this stage.

Q348 Mr Winnick: Has the Attorney’s office been
in touch with the Met over this matter?

Cressida Dick: Not as far as I am aware, sir, and I
would not expect them to be at this stage.

Q349 Mr Winnick: Finally, as far as the public
interest is concerned, the decision on whether or not
it is considered there should be a prosecution is out of
your hands. Am I correct? It is entirely up to the
Director of Public Prosecutions to decide what is in
the public interest, or am I wrong?

Cressida Dick: If we believe there is sufficient
evidence then, as you are aware I think, the CPS will
look at whether the evidence is sufficient and,
secondly, whether it is in the public interest. There
may be, depending on the offence, also an
involvement of the Attorney General.

Q350 Michael Ellis:	My simple question on

Snowden matters is will your investigation also
incorporate potential or possible offences under
section 58A of the Terrorism Act 2000?

Cressida Dick: Yes, indeed, we are looking at that as
a potential.

Q351 Michael Ellis: Commissioner, can I ask you
about Operation Alice, the matter concerning Andrew
Mitchell? As the Chairman was saying, each of the
three chief constables involved with the officers who
were involved in the Sutton Coldfield matter have
apologised and have been to see Mr Mitchell,
apparently. They had one officer involved. You have
said that there are eight Metropolitan Police officers
involved in alleged disciplinary matters, and you did
say that you were 100% behind your officers earlier
on. I want to press you on why you differ from the
three other chief constables as to the appropriateness
of going to see Andrew Mitchell and apologising to
him in the way that the other chiefs have done.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: The only distinction I
would draw is that my understanding is that in the
other chief constables’ appearances before you in fact
no misconduct or criminal charges were to follow
from the actions of their officers.

Chair: At that time.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: That was the very
challenge that you and others drew to their attention,
which is not the position I find myself in. As I have
tried to make clear, I have no defensiveness in
principle. I am quite happy to do it personally and
publicly when the right time comes, should that be
proved necessary. My only reservation is that until
some things are dealt with it would be unwise to make
that apology for something about which others may
then say I made a pre-emptive decision.

Q352 Paul Flynn: You said that in this inquiry you
are co-operating with the Crown Prosecution Service
and others. Who are the others?

Cressida Dick: Clearly in relation to the material that
appears to relate to Government material we have to
speak to Government departments and agencies about
that material.

Q353 Paul Flynn: Are you involving the security
services? Would you be under pressure from them for
a prosecution?

Cressida Dick: I don’t think we would be under any
pressure from them at all, sir. Whenever we are
investigating terrorism offences, and sometimes when
we are investigating Official Secrets Act offences, we
will be in touch with the agencies. We would not be
under any pressure. We would also normally be in
some contact with the Cabinet Office in relation to
the material.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 47

3 December 2013 Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe and Cressida Dick

Q354 Chair: Let us move to the rest of counter-
terrorism. Cressida Dick, are you embarrassed by the
fact that the Met has now lost two people who were
subject to a TPIM?

Cressida Dick: I am not embarrassed, sir. I am, of
course, as I think everybody is, quite frustrated.
However, I am pleased that our response when this
person went was very good.

Q355 Chair: Meaning what? He had escaped, so
what response could be good?

Cressida Dick: It is clearly not a good situation but
we didn’t make it any worse, if you like, by failing in
any way straight afterwards. I think we did very well
in our immediate response to it.

Q356 Chair: What else could you have done? If one
got into a taxi and went away and the other went into
a mosque and put on a burkha, your response after the
event is neither here nor there.

Cressida Dick: Less important. I accept that, sir.
Chair: The issue is that you are the head of counter-
terrorism and these two people were the subject of
TPIM orders. This is not something that the Home
Secretary can monitor every day but presumably the
police should be monitoring.

Cressida Dick: Certainly, and the agencies of the
security service are in the position of working with
the Home Office, but we are the primary people to try
to manage the risk that these people may pose,
primarily the risk that they may pose in engagement
in terrorism and then, secondarily, of course, any risk
that they might abscond. I have always been clear, and
indeed at this Committee, that we cannot reduce all
the risks to zero.

Q357 Chair: No, of course not, but there are so few
of them on there. You have a very large budget and
one of the reasons why Parliament votes you a large
budget is to enable you to do your operational duties
and the Home Secretary has to come before the House
and take questions from Members when somebody
goes missing. It is an operational issue. It is not
necessarily an issue for Ministers. When the old
regime goes in January, is it not going to be worse in
terms of the surveillance of individuals? Do you
prefer the old control order system? Do you have a
view on that?

Cressida Dick: There are quite a few points in your
comments, sir. First of all, I would refer you back,
and I know you have had other witnesses who have
said that beyond incarceration we can’t actually stop
every single person from making off should they so
wish, despite our very great efforts and indeed lots of
resources. Secondly, as I have said before, and I think
you have agreed with me, we have to balance across
the whole of our counter-terrorism effort, managing
risk posed by a wide variety of individuals, including
those on the TPIM measures. Thirdly, I think you
were talking about when they come off the measures.
We will need to manage any lingering risk that there
may be around them and also in this phase work as
well as we can with them to try to ensure that they
don’t pose any further risk. You have talked to me
before about the relative controls that exist within

TPIMs and control orders. It really is not a matter for
the police to say where the balance should lie.

Q358 Chair: We understand that, but we have all
been in Parliament a long time and when Ministers go
before the despatch box and say, “We want to increase
the number of days that people stay in detention”, as
was the case before, they say, “We have spoken to the
Commissioner—not this one of course, your
predecessor—and he says it is a very good idea that
we should have detention for 42 days”. Do you not
have a view as to what is the best way to implement
these?

Cressida Dick: I don’t wish to be discourteous, sir, but
I think that was a good example of where sometimes it
may be better for us not to get ourselves embroiled in
great party politics. What I would say is that we will
do our level best whatever the regime, for want of a
better word. We will give professional advice to the
Home Secretary and the Home Office. We have been
consistent in saying that we did believe that relocation
was an important measure, but of course it is not for
us to decide where the balance should lie.

Q359 Chair: No, but Mohammed Ahmed Mohamed
and Adebolajo—I don’t want you to talk about the
trial but just the fact that they have gone abroad, one
to Kenya and one to Somalia—have both ended up
back in the UK. Obviously Mohammed Ahmed
Mohamed is still missing along with Ibrahim Magag.
How closely do you work with the security services
when people come back into this country? Obviously
Adebolajo was brought back from Kenya and we
heard from Charles Farr that he had an obligation to
bring Mohammed Ahmed Mohamed back to the UK.
Are they under surveillance from the time they arrive
back?

Cressida Dick: I can’t talk about Mr Adebolajo, for
obvious reasons, but in terms of your general point
we would expect—assuming we are all aware,
assuming the security services, for example, are
aware—to be informed when they come back if
somebody has been involved or appears to have been
involved or has been accused of being involved in a
terrorist matter in another country, and we would work
very closely with the security services, and do, from
the moment they arrive at the port.

Q360 Chair: Did that happen with Mohammed
Ahmed Mohamed?

Cressida Dick: I am not in a position to talk about the
precise measures that we took but when we know
about it we work very closely with the agencies.
Chair: Thank you. That is very helpful.

Q361 Mr Winnick: How far is the country in danger
of another 7/7?

Cressida Dick: Sir, I think you will be aware that the
threat level in the country is currently at substantial,
which is one notch below where it was for much of
the 2000s. There is, though, as you will have seen
from the agency heads when they appeared at the
Intelligence and Security Committee and Andrew
Parker’s speech in public, an ongoing and enduring
threat. That threat is probably more diverse and more

Ev 48 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

3 December 2013 Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe and Cressida Dick

complex for us to deal with. Of course, we could not
rule out that someone somewhere might wish to
conduct a horribly impactive and spectacular attack
on that scale. We could not rule it out.

Q362 Mr Winnick: According to what the police
and the intelligence agencies have stated, there are a
number of people, in the hundreds, who are
considered to be dangerous and potentially dangerous
by way of outright terrorism in the UK. Is that the
position?

Cressida Dick: Yes, there are many people, both
people born and brought up here and in a variety of
other countries, who might pose a threat to the UK.

Q363 Mr Winnick: We all accept, and I am sure the
police no less than we do, that the overwhelming
majority of people whose religion is Islam or were
born into Islam even if they don’t observe the religion,
like in other groups, are perfectly law-abiding, loathe
terrorism, know full well that they could be as much
the subject of terrorism as the rest us. Are you
satisfied that enough is being done by MOS and other
Muslim groups in saying in effect that terrorism,
certainly terrorism in a country like ours, is in total
conflict with the Islamic religion?

Cressida Dick: I, for one, was very heartened by
comments that have been made over the recent
months and years, and in particular after the attack in
Woolwich, by a very broad range of people from our
Muslim communities to show their complete contempt
for terrorism and to distance themselves from it. As
you said, the vast majority of people in Muslim
communities, and that includes the vast majority of
people who are in positions of authority in mosques,
do exactly that. But I am sure there are one or two or
a few who are either less capable or innocent about
what might be happening within their community, and
on occasion we have had examples of people who are
present in mosques being extremists. This is not by
any means exclusive to Muslim communities.

Q364 Mr Winnick: Are there large numbers of
people in this country who go abroad for jihad?
Cressida Dick: I am not able to put a precise number
on it, nor do I think it would be very helpful even if
I could.

Mr Winnick: But generally.

Cressida Dick: I think when Mr Farr was here not so
long ago talked about the very large numbers of
people, more broadly, that we know are travelling to
Syria. Some of them are people who are seeking what
you called jihad and that number is extremely
worrying for us.

Q365 Mr Winnick: Would they be possibly people
who might want to inflict terrorism on the UK, or do
you make a separation there?

Cressida Dick: I think there is a very complex picture,
to be put it one way. Even people who previously have
been interested in jihad might travel for humanitarian
purposes. At the other end of the spectrum, there are
people who go very innocently and get caught up and
become very extreme and very trained, who might
come back up and pose a threat. We are extremely

concerned about people who may return from Syria
and pose a threat in the UK.

Q366 Yasmin Qureshi: Picking up on the theme
about overseas, we are told and it has happened that
some of the plots in this country have an overseas
connection. What is the Metropolitan Police doing to
build relationships or liaisons with other countries as
well as other agencies in those countries to tackle the
issue of terrorism?

Cressida Dick: I was able to put in a submission to
the Committee and I covered some of this in some
detail. Our whole approach in the UK is to try to work
really well locally with our local communities so that,
for example, a family who are worried about
somebody travelling would feel confident to come and
speak to us—and that is happening—to work very
effectively with our specialists at the regional and
national level in a way that is interoperable and
flexible, and then—to come to your point—to have a
very strong international reach. We have a number of
what we call counter-terrorism liaison officers in a
variety of countries whose job is to improve the
police-to-police relationship, to build capacity to help
the local agencies deal with terrorist matters. We also
work with and through the security service and MI6
to try to ensure that we have the best possible
understanding of what is going on in other countries
and where people in those countries might pose a
threat for us.

Q367 Yasmin Qureshi: You say that you have a
number of liaison officers in other countries. Do you
think you have enough resources? Are there enough
in numbers or do you need more or less?

Cressida Dick: It is important to say that these officers
are primarily funded by the counter-terrorist branch,
which you know is a ring-fenced branch so they are
not funded by, for example, the Metropolitan Police
budget, and secondarily also by the Foreign Office.
They have been investing in that capability and this
year we are expanding slightly the numbers that we
have and the countries that we have them in. That is
very much led by the Government saying where they
think it would make sense and us saying where we
think it would make best sense. So there are skilled
people, a scarce resource, in my view doing an
incredibly important job, and I know others believe
that they are very important in the wider counter-
terrorist effort. In general, we are expanding not
getting smaller.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: Although sometimes the
British police are criticised at home, internationally
we are well received, even where this country is not
always well received in some countries. I think you
are going to meet with an officer when you visit
Kenya, or whoever from the Committee is visiting
there. During the recent events, that officer was well
received when Britain is not always well received. It
is a useful conduit.

Q368 Chair: This is a point Mr Reckless has made
on a number of occasions, that the brand Britain is
very high in terms of policing. I don’t know whether
you have seen, because you were obviously preparing

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 49

3 December 2013 Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe and Cressida Dick

for this evidence session, the article in today’s
Evening Standard about the number of London
teenagers who are travelling out to Syria to fight. Who
is it who should say, “Don’t go”? Commissioner, this
message does not seem to come across. People travel
because they think that they are going to take part in
jihad. Some of them die and some of them become
even more radicalised, and then they come back into
this country. Who should tell them not to go,
Commissioner?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I suppose a number of
people, Chair. I invite Cressida to add anything if she
would like to. First of all, parents. We have had
contact from worried parents who don’t know where
to turn to stop it or get advice. You would hope that
mosque leaders, as was said earlier, are going to play
a part in that too, and of course politicians and
governments have a role to play in sending a message
out. As far as the police are concerned, we advise
people not to get involved in terrorist groups and not
to travel to war zones for their own safety let alone
anything else.

Q369 Chair: Is there some profiling being done? Is
there some research on the geographical areas that
they go from? Perhaps there should be school visits
by officers just telling these people.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: Perhaps Cressida could
add a little detail about what we do.

Chair: Yes, “Please don’t go because if you go you
will end up either dead or there will be severe
problems for you when you get home”. I think if we
send that message across we have to stop them going.
After the parents ring and ask for advice, it is probably
too late, isn’t it?

Cressida Dick: We entirely agree with you, sir, and
we are doing a great deal of work. Not just police
officers but our Prevent officers have a whole series
of campaigns and messaging that they are doing in
areas that we feel might be particularly vulnerable to
this area of travel. We are monitoring as best we can
where people are going from and concentrating our
efforts there, but it is a collaborative approach, as the
Commissioner said, across us and the communities,
and also other public authorities.

Q370 Chair: Do you find your budget is under strain,
Commissioner, in respect of spending money on
Prevent, on sending officers out in order to tell them
to stop?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: We are always under
strain, Chair, about our money but to be fair I am not
sure we would say this is preventing us doing things
that we want to. Of course more money is always
appreciated but I don’t think it would be reasonable to
say it was causing us particular problems in this area.
Cressida Dick: If I could add, sir, as you know, the
Home Secretary has said the counter-terrorist police
capabilities will be maintained for two years. Within
that we are constantly looking at where we can be
more efficient and where we should adjust investment,
and we will be investing some more in Prevent work
because of what is going on at the moment.

Q371 Michael Ellis: I understand from recent
reported cases that the Home Secretary has recently
in one particular case of suspected terrorism cancelled
a passport. It had already been cancelled once before
and the Supreme Court had “uncancelled” it. Are there
any extra powers that you think are needed by the
police, whether it be going to fight in foreign parts or
any other areas where you are screaming out for more
powers, or are the powers sufficient?

Cressida Dick: There is quite a wide range of things
that the police, and the Home Secretary can call on,
not just powers but our covert capabilities and our
police abilities and also the agencies’ abilities. There
is a wide range of things, but it would be ridiculous
to say that we should not look at whether there are
further powers that would be helpful. Indeed, in recent
weeks we have been in some conversations with the
Home Office about what might be adjusted or what
might be—

Michael Ellis: Can you elaborate?

Cressida Dick: I am not sure it would be appropriate
to give you any great detail, sir, and I am not the
person that has been speaking to them, but in terms
of—

Michael Ellis: But there are talks?

Cressida Dick: There are most certainly talks: what
could we do to strengthen our powers in order to
prevent people travelling?

Q372 Michael Ellis: Given the concerns about
foreign fighters, what sort of work is the Metropolitan
Police doing to identify and monitor UK nationals
who travel in order to engage in this type of activity?
Cressida Dick: Again, it is very much a partnership
approach with, where it is appropriate, the security
service, but we are doing everything we can to try to
find out who may be minded to go and why, as the
Chair has said, to intervene and dissuade or help other
people to dissuade them where we can. But also where
they are set on going and there is no power, the
intelligence would suggest they are going to go and
we don’t have any evidential reason or any other
reason to be able to physically stop them, then we
most certainly are monitoring what they are doing to
the best of our ability.

Q373 Michael Ellis: Did you want to add anything,
Commissioner?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: The only thing I might
add is that we make a broad point about British
policing, which is having local neighbourhood
officers, which is not often recognised, is fundamental
to our national security investment; partly who do we
identify as terrorists and partly what information we
get from the public, from a parent, school or wherever
about people who are thinking about, for example,
going to Syria. That information is fed into the
system. Then you have to check at the borders: is
there any suspicious activity there? Of course, both
security services work with us to see what we can
gather from our intelligence from abroad and at home
to see who might be thinking about this sort of
movement.

Ev 50 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

3 December 2013 Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe and Cressida Dick

Q374 Michael Ellis:	Is this an area where

community police officers have been able to help
identify those who are claiming to engage or have
engaged in fighting abroad?

Cressida Dick: Absolutely. As the Commissioner
said, it is the foundation of counter-terrorism policing.
People tend to think of the detectives and the forensic
people and all the specialists who are very capable,
and probably in many respects the best in the world,
but actually the foundation is the local neighbourhood
officers, the friendly face, those that people can get to
know, trust and understand. That is where we get our
intelligence from.

Q375 Nicola Blackwood: I want to ask you about
prosecution of counter-terrorism. There is a major
terrorism trial that was reported in The Times a few
weeks ago. I realise you can’t talk about the details of
the case at all, but it is a little bit concerning that
essentially what is being reported is that almost all of
the details of the trial will be held secretly, the names
of the accused, the details of the complaints against
them and so on. This may be necessary for operational
purposes in this case but how often has this happened
with other similar terrorism cases?

Cressida Dick: I am not aware of any other case in
which we have done this. I will double check when I
go back but I am not aware of a single other case. I
would agree with what I think is probably the subtext
of your question, which is that it is absolutely
imperative wherever we can that people know what is
going on in the justice system and particularly in
terrorism where we have very great powers. It is a
very controversial issue and people have all sorts of
different views on the subject. We would want to be
open wherever we possibly can and I can assure you,
in terms of our first decisions around that case and
any case, there is a very careful consideration as to
whether that is the right thing to do. I would regard it
as a very rare occurrence but, of course, as you are
probably aware, in this instance the judge has put
these restrictions on.

Q376 Nicola Blackwood: Those restrictions have
gone on to this case but does your application for
reporting restrictions, anonymity and non-disclosure
of pretty much the whole case in this instance signal
any kind of policy change?

Cressida Dick: Absolutely not.

Q377 Nicola Blackwood: Your intention would
generally be to allow disclosure in every other case
where it is possible?

Cressida Dick: Wherever we possibly can we would
want to do that, yes.

Q378 Paul Flynn: How would you apportion the
terrorist threat to the UK from three groups: Al-
Qaeda, home-grown terrorists born and brought up
here, and the Taliban?

Cressida Dick: Al-Qaeda, as know, is now very
different in some respects from the Al-Qaeda of a few
years ago. It has an awful lot of affiliated groups,
people who aspire to be like, people who are
interested in, so it is quite a wide set of groups now

that might be put under the Al-Qaeda brand, if I can
give it that name. Undoubtedly, several of those
groups do pose a threat to people in the UK. As a
brand, it inspires other people, coming to the home-
grown, and we know that through the internet and
other methods it has caused many people to move
from being somewhat radicalised, slightly extreme in
their views, to becoming violent extremists who
actually want to cause attacks and hurt people. That
phenomenon is very worrying to us, in particular the
phenomenon that perhaps people may not in the future
feel the need so much to seek permission or
commander control from elsewhere but will just,
having seen something on the internet, decide that is
what they are going to be, will be self-starting. So
both pose a very great threat to us, home-grown and
from abroad. Al-Qaeda is a very pervasive brand that
is affecting all of this. It is not the only one but it is a
very pervasive brand. I am afraid I am not really
qualified to talk about the importance of the Taliban
as a threat to the UK.

Q379 Paul Flynn: You haven’t answered my
question. I asked for some proportion of risk. But
moving on from that, the continuing justification for
sending British troops to die in Afghanistan is the
threat from the Taliban of committing terrorist threats
in the United Kingdom. Next year those troops are
coming home. Do you expect to see an increase in
terrorist offences by the Taliban?

Cressida Dick: Again, sir, I do not think I am
qualified to assess that. I am sorry if I didn’t answer
your question before.

Q380 Paul Flynn: All right, if I repeat it again. What
I would like you to answer is is it a third, a third, a
third? Is there no threat from the Taliban as Al-Qaeda
disappear? Is it a threat almost entirely from home-
grown terrorists? The majority of the atrocities that
have occurred have been by people from this country
who have been brought up in this country. Isn’t that
true? Are we fighting an enemy in Afghanistan that
presents a threat that doesn’t really exist? If it does
exist, we are getting rid of our protection next year
and presumably the Taliban are going to come in in
great numbers to blow up our streets.

Cressida Dick: I am sorry, sir, I am going to have to
say I genuinely am not qualified to talk about the
threat of the Taliban.

Chair: We can accept those remarks.

Cressida Dick: Nor do I think anybody, and certainly
not me, could put figures on the degree of risk of Al-
Qaeda in other parts of the world and its influence in
the UK on individuals, together with some others who
pose a significant threat to the UK.

Q381 Mark Reckless: Sir Bernard, we have seen
how the reputation of British policing can be used to
gain co-operation and support overseas. Do you see
prospects for using that international reputation to
generate more income that can be put back into British
policing? Is the College of Policing the body we can
look to to do that?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: In short, I think there is
an opportunity there and there are various ways we

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 51

3 December 2013 Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe and Cressida Dick

can do that. The Commonwealth remains a powerful
link for us. We can think about the countries in which
we have counter-terrorist links and serious and
organised crime. The overall brand probably is British
policing. The Metropolitan Police, New Scotland
Yard, is a very powerful brand. We get visitors almost
every week from different parts of the world who
wanting to share but also learn, so I think we have
something to offer. We have been approached by
different people trying to help us to sell our brand and
I think the only difficulty is working out what is an
appropriate way of finding a vehicle to do that. We
are already talking to the College of Policing about
how we can work together, because of course they can
offer training and they have their own brand but they
don’t have the operational brand and the size that the
Met offers. So I think there is an opportunity. How it
works I think is something for the Government to
consider as well.

Finally, I would say whatever we do ought to support
foreign policy. It ought not to be the Met or the
College of Policing to say, “We will have this link
with this country”. We ought to be supporting and
developing British foreign policy, and clearly with
over 200 countries in the world we can’t do it
everywhere so we have to prioritise our efforts. But
the military, security services and the police have
something to offer in developing relationships.

Q382 Chair: You confirm that you did not come here
on a cycle?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I do, Chair.

Chair: Good.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: That is not remarkable
of itself.

Q383 Dr Huppert: Terrorism is clearly something
we are all very concerned about, as we are about the
actions of paedophiles and a range of other things.
These are often used as scapegoats, reasons why more
and more powers are always needed. We have seen
this many times. Presumably you are both aware of
Project Spade in Canada.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I must admit I have not
heard that one.

Dr Huppert: I find that extremely interesting. This is
a very large operation by Canadian police where they
broke a huge paedophile ring.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: This is the recent one?

Dr Huppert: This was about 18 months ago. They
managed to release hundreds of children from
astonishingly abusive conditions. They also identified
2,345 suspects in the UK. They sent the information
approximately 18 months ago to CEOP. You say it is
very recent, because until last week absolutely nothing
had happened about this whatsoever. You say you
don’t know anything about it even now. 2,500
suspects for very serious offences and you are saying
you did not know about it.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: The first thing I was
trying to explain is that I had not heard the name. We
have so many operations, I did not recognise the
name. Now that you have helpfully explained the
particular case, I had not heard about the 18-month
history of this and I am afraid I am not briefed to

answer how CEOP dealt with that information,
although I can go away and try to find out. It would
not be the first time, sadly, that we have received large
volumes of data where paedophilia has been an issue
on the internet. Operation Ore, which I think is now
probably over 10 years old, has had a long time in
terms of trying to get to the bottom of these
investigations. I can go away and find our best
information. I am sorry I didn’t recognise the name
but I did see the press reports over the last two weeks,
which was my “recent” comment.

Q384 Dr Huppert: The National Crime Agency
have said that they are going to have an independent
review as to how they managed not to look at this
data. Would you agree that it is quite important that
before asking for new powers to do all sorts of
wonderful things, getting the basics right, like having
a look at files containing names of suspects, might be
a good thing to do?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I would. The only reason
I am hesitant to make any judgment is that I don’t
know enough to know when CEOP received it, in
what format and what they did with it. I want to make
sure before I comment that the Metropolitan Police
received nothing, and if we did what we did with it. I
am afraid I am not briefed but I will go away, as a
result of this question, and inform the Committee
about what I find out.

Q385 Dr Huppert: That would be helpful. It would
also be helpful if you could find out for us the form of
the independent review that is going to be undertaken.
Moving on to another issues with counter-terrorism,
we have discussed before the idea that counter-
terrorism should move into the National Crime
Agency, because it is an national issue after all. Has
your position changed on that, either of you?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: My view is that you have
to be clear about why we would change. Our model
in this country is very well respected, both in police
and security service terms. Most of the rest of the
world looks to our model with some respect and some
awe at times. Without being complacent, I think we
have a pretty good model that is working well. I have
to be really careful because we could have an attack
tomorrow and everybody would say, “Why didn’t you
predict it?” but on the whole I think our system is
working very well. The things that I think make it
strong are the fact that, going back to the original
point, we have about 250,000 people involved in
policing in this country, 130,000, 140,000 cops and
then all the people who support us. That is a big very
footprint of people. We need to connect with over 60
million people so it is vital that we have that link. I
think if we isolate the terrorist investigators—we
already have an isolated security service and the NCA
are a national policing body and having a link in with
local policing is a very important thing. During our
investigations around extremism for Islamism we
have allegations that this becomes a political issue. I
think the fact that police get involved at a local level
is a strength. So for me that is a very powerful point.
Secondly, the National Crime Agency is a very new
body. It has been in place for a matter of weeks. The

Ev 52 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

3 December 2013 Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe and Cressida Dick

reason it was set up is because it was perceived that
its predecessor was not working in the way that
Parliament or anyone else wanted it to work. So it
now has to establish its credentials and I think it
would be unfair on it to then give it an extremely new
and quite radical change in terms of these new powers
and responsibilities. For many reasons, it is for the
Government to decide what they would prefer but I
think they are the things that would weigh on my
mind if I was called on to give advice.

Q386 Chair: If I could just interrupt for one second
on that. You are not ruling it out? Some of us agree
with what you have said about the NCA, the jigsaw
is not complete, as we know, but five years down the
line it may be sensible to put counter-terrorism in a
national organisation because counter-terrorism is a
national issue, isn’t it?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: Chairman, I don’t think I
quite said that.

Chair: No, but I am asking you.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: So I am giving you my
view now and I am not trying to project something.
Chair: You are not ruling it out though?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I am not quite saying that.
I am not projecting myself for four to five years for a
few reasons. Lord Stevens independent report for the
Labour Party proposes a different structure of policing
altogether. If you accept that model there would be
nine forces. This not a Met-led project.

Q387 Chair: He does not make a comment about
where CT should sit, does he? That is the problem.
Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: No, but if I develop this
just a little. We have five counter-terrorist units out
there. It is not just the Met. Then we have the counter-
terrorist intelligence units. We have an embedded
complex picture where we have a discrete body of
people who are investigating counter-terrorism. We
have a link to the security service. I think if we were
to consider changing the model, for reasons that ought
to be established, then we would have to consider all
that picture. There are very many options, one of
which might be the NCA. In considering those
options, the NCA is one of them. I don’t rule it out,
but I think the model we have is pretty good.

Q388 Dr Huppert: To move away from counter-
terrorism—we can explore that further—you made
some interesting comments. It is a shame my
colleague Ian Austin is not here because he and I co-
chair the all-party parliamentary cycling group. You
made some interesting comments in your role where
you have a responsibility for traffic policing and
safety through London and there have been a number
of tragic deaths. Your comments were, “It seems to
me there is a lot of traffic and personally I wouldn’t
cycle, fair enough, but some people don’t have the
choice. Economically it is not easy.” I don’t know if
you have had a chance to reflect on your comments
and whether there is anything you would like to say
about your attitude to it but also what the Metropolitan
Police are going to be doing to make it possible for
people to cycle safely.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I have had a lot of

opportunity to reflect on my comments. You may have
seen that I published not a retraction but certainly a
clarification within hours, so I have reflected on my
comments. I suppose the first thing I have to say, and
I was answering personally, is that I don’t cycle. I
can’t be dishonest about that. I just don’t cycle. I don’t
find it attractive. I would ride a horse round London
but I wouldn’t ride a cycle, but neither would I in
Sussex or anywhere else. It is not a comment on
London necessarily but that is how it was taken. What
I should have probably considered was that generally
cycling is quite a safe event. If you look at London
this year, I think one more person died on the roads,
which is a very sad thing. I think 14 people have died
this year compared to 13 last year and 11 the year
before. I think there are fewer people seriously
injured. This is despite the fact there has been more
cycling. On the whole cycling is increasing and
therefore you would think the risk increases. I suppose
I was just reflecting on the fact that it can be very
unfair for the cyclists regardless of whose mistake it
is. So I think I made that point inelegantly, and
straying into the economic area was not really any
other point than some people may not have that
choice. That is all.

Q389 Dr Huppert: Thank you for those comments.
What will the Metropolitan Police be doing to assist
in this?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: Yes, of course. What we
decided to do is for a period of around 90 days, three
months, certainly over the next couple of months, at
166 locations we are asking our officers—I think we
said over the 24-hour period around 2,500—to
concentrate on junctions particularly where cyclists
appear to be most vulnerable. So we have identified
the 166 and already over the first three weeks I think
we have issued 5,000 fixed penalty tickets to both
drivers and cyclists for inappropriate behaviour to try
to encourage them to bike better. Many have been
stopped and advised. I was talking to a journalist
before I came in who said he had been stopped and
advised, so clearly it is having some impact. We are
getting an indirect benefit. Many of the areas in which
there are hotspots in terms of inappropriate behaviour
or accidents and collisions also coincidentally are
quite often crime hotspots, so by the high levels of
patrolling we are getting a joint benefit. People seem
to have appreciated it and the sort of things we are
concentrating on are obviously motorists who use
their mobile phones, drivers of large vehicles who
don’t seem to be giving consideration to cyclists,
cyclists who go through red lights and don’t look or
go over the white line when they should remain
behind. We are trying to deal with both fairly but
acknowledge that often the cyclists will come off
worse whatever the bad behaviour.

Q390 Dr Huppert: There have been a lot of
comments in the past that the police haven’t looked
into collisions seriously. Will you make sure that that
changes?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I think I might reject that,
if you wouldn’t mind. For any fatal collision we have

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 53

3 December 2013 Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe and Cressida Dick

a set of accident investigators who are pretty well
qualified. In fact, if the Committee has never had a
look, if you would like a visit to meet them I think
you would find it fascinating. They are qualified as
engineers. They work with many people to establish
exactly what happened in a collision, not necessarily
to blame but to understand so that the coroner is well
informed and if there is a prosecution, which does not
always happen, the court is well informed. It helps
design the roads, affect driver behaviour and give
advice to the Government and Parliament on what the
law should be. I think we do pay particular attention
and frankly whether someone has died on the roads or
died by a criminal act, both are important things. We
know that broadly probably two to two and a half
times more people die on the roads than die by
criminal acts or homicide.

Q391 Chair: Just a couple of points and then we are
going to close. First of all, as far as Hillsborough is
concerned, just to put this matter at rest, I know that
the Hillsborough families have talked about a
statement you may or may not have made. It was 20
years ago and some of us can’t necessarily remember
what happened 20 minutes ago. Did you make a
statement? Was it in writing, was it a telephone call,
has it gone to the right people? Do you want to clarify
it just for the record?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: You are quite right, the
length of time has not helped my memory. I have tried
to put this in the public domain. I would say two
things. One is that at the time I was an inspector in
the South Yorkshire Police. I was at university and on
the Saturday when this horrible event happened, at the
request of the force I went back on duty to try to help
at the local Hillsborough Boys Club. That is what I
did that evening and tried to help until the following
morning. There has been a more recent request by the
press about whether or not I made a statement. I have
to say genuinely I thought I had made a statement,
which is what then got confusing when I was shown
a document that I took to be a statement and now
looks as though it was a written account of an oral
telephone conversation. So I think that accounts for
the mis-description. But I have said I am very happy
to help the family—I think it is actually one family—
and also the Independent Police Complaints
Commission and those who are working for them
around Hillsborough to do anything I can to clarify
anything that happened in that boys club because there
is nothing to be hidden and I don’t think I have
anything to be ashamed of.

Q392 Chair: As far as you are concerned, it was an
account of a phone call and that was it?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I think that accounts for
the confusion but I have contributed to that confusion
by not recognising the difference in the documents I
was shown.

Q393 Mr Winnick: No criticism of the Chair of
course. He said 20 years is a long time. 39 years ago
the pub atrocities occurred in Birmingham and the
relatives are still seeking to find out who committed
such a terrible crime. As far as Hillsborough is

concerned, we have had evidence from those involved
in the fight for justice to clear the names that were
slurred by the press and the Government of the day,
or at least some Ministers within the Government. Do
you recognise the very strong feelings of those who
are campaigning over this issue?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: Of course. Some of them
have lost children, certainly many people have lost a
relative or a friend. That is a terrible thing and
compounded by concerns about the truthfulness of the
inquiry and the things that followed. I entirely
understand it. I did work in Merseyside for nine years,
as chief constable for five, and I met some of the
families and their representatives, so I entirely
understand the emotion. It is a very natural thing that
everybody wants to make sure that they get justice.

Q394 Chair: I will be writing to you because I am
sure you do not have the figures here about the amount
of property that is seized or collected by the police
and retained. There are specific examples of accidents
that have occurred in London where the police have
taken property and not returned it in a timely fashion.
Would you look into that? I am giving you notice.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: Can I just check, is this
criminal assets where we have seized them or is it
general?

Q395 Chair: It is general accidents on the roads
where you have taken material and not handed it back.
I am going to write to you about it but you are alerted
to that.

Finally, the Committee has decided to hold an inquiry
into female genital mutilation. Obviously this is an
issue of interest to the Met. Is there an explanation
as to why so few people, in fact nobody, have been
prosecuted for FGM since the law came into
existence?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe:	There are some

explanations where they are justified, but I think it is
for others to judge. As I think we had a discussion
about, I have a personal interest in making sure that
we do get a prosecution. The Committee may have
seen the documentary by Leyla Hussein. I recommend
it to those who have not seen it. It is an incredibly
powerful about what FGM is, not what is the theory
but what actually happens, which is a pretty horrible
thing. Also we need to educate not only men, I
suspect, about what this means and what the
expectations are of women. I offer it. I have met Leyla
and we are going to work together to see what we can
do about finding out whether we can get prosecutions,
particularly around cutters, the people who commit
this horrible thing either abroad or at home. We have
made a start on that and we are meeting again in a
couple of weeks time.

Going back to your original point about prosecution,
over the last couple of years we have had five cases in
the prosecution phase, certain investigations moving
through to a potential charge. The usual challenge is
that the victim will not complain. Sometimes it is a
child or it is a child who would have to complain
about the parent who arranged the cutting and that
causes incredible tensions. I think we now have one
case that we think may have some opportunities,

Ev 54 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

3 December 2013 Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe and Cressida Dick

which does not fall into that category. But the usual
challenge is that either the child is too young to
complain or they, as an adult, have to complain
against a parent, apart from the fact that many people
from some communities do not understand that it is
illegal in this country.

Chair: Of course. We are holding an inquiry and we
would very much like you or one of your colleagues
to give evidence.

Q396 Nicola Blackwood: Sir Bernard, the challenges
that you have just mentioned are challenges that often
you have to deal with in complex child abuse cases,
child sexual exploitation cases and domestic abuse
cases. We have obviously come a long way in
prosecuting those cases. One of the ways that we have
come a long way is by raising awareness and expertise
among statutory agencies and teachers and parents in
identifying indicators and knowing when to refer and
who to refer to. I know that there was statutory
guidance and guidance that was put out from the
Home Office. How many referrals, from secondary
witnesses I suppose, do you actually get to pick up
cases or are you just waiting for victims themselves
to come in?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: I will be careful how I
describe this, but we do not get many referrals from
education or health, and that would be helpful. If there
is childbirth involved you would think that these
things are fairly obvious. There are two things that
come into play. One is a lack of education for all the
professionals involved about what it means and what
are the physical symptoms. You would think for health
professionals it is obvious but I understand it is not
always as obvious with various forms of FGM.
Secondly, there are sometimes cultural sensitivities
that I would say are inappropriate. People trying to do
the right thing sometimes do the wrong thing. So I
think the whole system needs a shakeup. I will accept
our responsibility but I think together we have to do
something significantly different. The final thing I
would mention is discussions about how we could use
some of the tactics we ordinarily use against organised
crime in this area to prevent a victim having to give
evidence.

Q397 Nicola Blackwood: To help us with our
inquiry, would you send us your statistics about your
referrals and the victims who have come forward that
have led to the ongoing prosecutions that you have at
the moment? It would be helpful.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: Yes. I can certainly
provide it if it is any help to the Committee, taking
names out, giving the details of the cases so that you
understand some of the dilemmas that you might
appreciate and help you understand why individuals
have a real dilemma.

Q398 Chair: That would be very helpful. Very
finally, Assistant Commissioner, you are the most

senior woman police officer in the country and, Sir
Bernard, you are the most senior male police officer
in the country, so the Committee is very fortunate to
have you both together. How does the police service
turn the page following Plebgate and Hillsborough
and the Jimmy Savile issue and all these other
problems in terms of leadership? How do we turn that
page, Cressida Dick?

Cressida Dick: You have catalogued a number of
issues and problems. I think that our day-to-day
interactions with the public tell us that a huge
proportion of the public judge us by our actions and
not by what they read in the newspapers or other
issues that they are finding out about second or third
hand. The most important thing for me is that we
continue to improve our day-to-day service delivery
and our ability and, for example, prevent terrorist
attacks or respond effectively. I think that we have
very good and strong leadership of policing in this
country. However, clearly some cases have suggested,
as with other institutions, that we are not perfect.
There is a job for all of us, including the most senior
people, to focus on our leadership development,
bringing up new, young, different people and ensuring
that they are inculcated with the very best of British
policing, which we touched on when we were talking
about counter-terrorism liaison officers overseas. The
ethos of British policing is admired all round the
world. We have some great leaders and we need to
develop some more great leaders.

Q399 Chair:	You are one of those leaders,

Commissioner. How have we turned the page over the
last few years?

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe: Just to build quickly on
what Cressida said, I think we shouldn’t throw out all
our strengths. We have a great many strengths. We are
one of the, if not the only, unarmed police services in
the world, which means that we must have the support
of the public. Without that we cannot go forward. We
cannot be complacent about that. The Met has four
values about being courageous, morally as well as
physically, about compassion, about being
professional, but it has to be built on a bedrock of
integrity, and that is where the police service has to
be. I think we should celebrate the fact that we are all
shocked where integrity is challenged but we all have
to respond with great vigour and make sure that
integrity is maintained. There is no such thing as part-
time integrity so we have to make sure that we
maintain that and promote it in our selection and
training of people and make sure that we respond with
great alacrity if we find there are times when human
behaviour lets us down. But we shouldn’t throw out
the great strengths that we have in the British police
service.

Chair: Commissioner, Assistant Commissioner, thank
you very much for coming today.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 55

Tuesday 14 January 2014

Members present:
Keith Vaz (Chair)

Ian Austin
Nicola Blackwood
Mr James Clappison
Michael Ellis

Paul Flynn
Dr Julian Huppert
Mark Reckless
Mr David Winnick

Examination of Witness

Witness: Cerie Bullivant, Journalist, gave evidence.

Q398 Chair: Mr Bullivant, welcome. Thank you
very much for coming. Our apologies for making you
wait. We had an additional witness.

The Committee is conducting a detailed inquiry into
counter-terrorism. You may have seen some of the
previous hearings. We are very keen to hear from you
in respect of your history and past as someone who
was the subject of a control order. You can take it as
read that we understand the concerns that you had
about having this particular order placed upon you.
How can you describe life under a control order?
Cerie Bullivant: It is almost an oxymoron to use the
term “Life under a control order”. You don’t have a
life while you are under a control order. Everything is
as it says on the tin. It is claustrophobic and it is
controlled. Every day every sort of action you are
taking is being monitored. With all of the conditions
upon you that you are constantly worried about
breaching and trying not to breach, it is like having a
sword hanging over your neck. You know that for the
slightest mishap you could face an arrest, a trial and
potentially five years in prison. It is telling that when
I was in prison for breaching the order there were
three other people in prison at the same time as myself
for breaching control orders and all three of us were
held on the medical wing because of severe reactive
depression. One of the people was suffering from post
traumatic stress disorder. So every single person who
was in prison related to this was suffering from severe
mental health problems as a result of that.

Q399 Chair: Were you surprised that you were put
under a control order, bearing in mind that you were
about to travel to Bangladesh and Syria? Why do you
think that the British Government felt that you were
going to be a threat if you left the country?

Cerie Bullivant: I was very surprised when I was put
on the control order. I had never been involved in
criminality; I had never been arrested before; I had
never even had any problems with the police. It is
worth pointing out that at that time Syria was not the
Syria that it is today.

Q400 Chair: Yes. Remind us of the timeframe.

Cerie Bullivant: It was 2006. Iraq was kicking off at
that time and there was a lot of instability there, but I
was going to Syria mainly looking to work with
orphans and I wanted to study a bit of Arabic, just do
some travelling, some backpacking. At that time Syria
was a common place for people to go and see ancient
architecture, the history from the Crusades.

Q401 Chair: Although you were not involved in
criminality, it is alleged—and maybe you can tell the
Committee the correct situation—that you knew
somebody who was related to somebody else who was
involved in terrorist-related activities. Is that right? Is
that relationship right, you were not involved but you
knew somebody who was related to somebody else?
Cerie Bullivant: I knew somebody whose brother was
on remand awaiting a trial for a terrorism-related
offence. At the time I didn’t know that his brother
was. It is not the sort of thing that was put out there
publicly. The person who was on remand had changed
his name by deed poll and so had a different name to
my friend, so I had no way of linking those two. But
by two degrees of separation I was connected to
somebody who on remand for a terrorism-related
offence. He had not been convicted at that time either.

Q402 Chair: You received no explanation or apology
from the British Government or anyone else as to why
you have been put through a control order and through
all the judicial proceedings that you have been
involved in?

Cerie Bullivant: Quite the contrary. After I was
cleared in the High Court and in the Old Bailey, the
Home Office said that they still considered me to be
a threat and a danger. I have since gone on to work
with various human rights groups like Liberty and I
have worked at Amnesty and Cageprisoners. I have
been hampered from working on the issues that are
closest to my heart and that I know the most about—
control orders and TPIMs and these things—because
my name has been on a list banning everybody I know
who is on a TPIM from communicating with me even
though I have gone through probably a more
strenuous security check and proved myself as more
innocent than anyone should ever have to. For even
new people who came on to TPIMs, my name was on
a list of people they were not allowed to speak to.

Q403 Chair: So how all of this has happened is still
baffling to you?

Cerie Bullivant: About a month before my High
Court appearance we were given little bits of
information, but the main piece of information that we
found out was by coincidence from our own
investigations. We found out some of the secret
evidence, which turned out to be a phone call that was
made to the anti-terror hotline from an associate of
my mother’s. Just before my High Court appearance,
the lady got in touch with my mother again and said,

Ev 56 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

14 January 2014 Cerie Bullivant

“I am really sorry, I was drunk and I made a phone
call to the anti-terror hotline and said that Cerie was
probably a terrorist. He is 21, he is white. Why would
he want to go to Syria? Someone must have
brainwashed him. Why has he become a Muslim? He
has grown a beard. Someone must have brainwashed
him”. She had made this call to the anti-terror hotline.
We brought that up—

Q404 Chair: So it was anecdotal evidence made by
a third party?

Cerie Bullivant: Who hadn’t spoken to me since I had
been converted.

Q405 Chair: Is your feeling that the evidence was
never properly tested?

Cerie Bullivant: I would say that there was no
impetus on either the security services or the police to
put due diligence into testing the evidence, because in
their mind it was never going to be thoroughly
checked, there was never going to be an adversarial
court system to test that evidence anyway.

Q406 Mr Clappison: Forgive me for asking this, but
it strikes me as the first question on this. Presumably
when you first came into contact with the authorities
over this you told them what you have told us now.
What did they say to you?

Cerie Bullivant: From the moment I was first stopped,
during the whole process, I was completely open with
the police. When I was stopped at Heathrow Airport,
like any other member of society I was just in the
mind-set that if the police are talking to me the best
thing to do is to be as open as possible and they are
going to realise that I have not done anything wrong.
That questioning took nine hours at Heathrow Airport.
They asked me about everything, about primary
schools that I went to, what music bands I liked. We
even joked about the fact that I like 1980s folk pop.
The detail that we went into was incredible, but none
of that mattered and when I was put on the control
order I was still given no reason as to why it was that
I was put on it.

Q407 Mr Clappison: In the course of your interview,
did they tell you anything about the evidence that they
presumably had, or believed they had?

Cerie Bullivant: They didn’t tell me anything about
the evidence and beyond simple and obvious
questions such as, “Do you agree with 9/11 and 7/
7?” They never asked me anything about terrorism or
terrorism-related activities either. They didn’t ask me
any questions about would I be interested in going to
Iraq, was I interested in jihad, what were my thoughts
on this or that. Literally I was asked the most basic of
questions on the issue and that was it.

Q408 Mr Clappison: You are telling us that you did
not have the opportunity to hear what it was they had
against you or to comment on it?

Cerie Bullivant: No. Even up until the moment in the
High Court and even to this day I still don’t know in
detail what their evidence was and what their basis
was for why they did that. To me, that is one of the
huge problems of a system where you have secret

courts and secret evidence because you are denying
the person who is accused of a crime any chance to
defend themselves legitimately.

Q409 Ian Austin: Why do you think the judge said
that he was satisfied that the Secretary of State’s
decision to make a control order was justified on the
material available at the time?

Cerie Bullivant: To my recollection, the judge said
that he thought that the Home Secretary at the time
they put it on thought that what they were doing was
the correct thing but that if he had seen it the day after
it was put on he would have quashed it. He goes on
to say that later on.

Q410 Ian Austin: No, he said that he was satisfied
that reasonable grounds for suspicion do not now exist
but at the time—

Cerie Bullivant: I think if you read the statement in
full—I remember it quite clearly from the day—he
did say that if he had seen it straight after it was put
on and seen all of the evidence he would have quashed
it then as well.

Q411 Ian Austin: Would you agree that there will be
circumstances in which the intelligence services and
the security services get information as a result of
their operations and it is not possible to make that
information public in a public court because to do so
would put intelligence and security personnel at risk?
Cerie Bullivant: I would say that it is impossible to
commit a crime in the UK, especially a terrorism-
related crime, without leaving an evidence trail. If we
want to establish a system that will keep Britain safe,
what we need to do and the laws that we need to use
are laws that will put people who are dangerous in
prison, not under house arrest. We need to do that
by open courts and by a jury. The gentleman giving
evidence before me was saying that the jury is the
cornerstone of British justice. If people have
committed crimes then there needs to be evidence
brought, a jury and a trial. The fact of the matter is
that control orders are unfair and unsafe.

Q412 Ian Austin: Just one other question, when you
absconded from the control order had you been
subject to relocation or where were you living at that
point? Had you been forced to move away from
London?

Cerie Bullivant: No, I was never subject to forced
relocation.

Q413 Ian Austin: Do you think it would have been
more difficult for you to have absconded if you had
been forced to relocate? If you had been sent away to
a city where you knew nobody, hundreds of miles
away, and you had no contacts and no friends would
you have found it as easy to have absconded?

Cerie Bullivant: I don’t think that would have made
a demonstrable difference in my absconding.

Q414 Michael Ellis: The system of control orders
that you referred to has been repealed by this
Government, but the previous Government brought
those in for a purpose. Do you accept that the reason

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 57

14 January 2014 Cerie Bullivant

why those orders and subsequent similar orders have
been brought into existence is to prevent terrorist
atrocities in this country? They have a good purpose
behind them. You would say, of course, would you
not, Mr Bullivant, that they are unfair, but the purpose
behind restricting the liberty of certain individuals, a
very small number of individuals, is so that the
security services can satisfy a public need to prevent
terrorist attacks? Would you accept that?

Cerie Bullivant: I would accept that the intention
behind bringing them in is to prevent terrorism from
happening but I would disagree that they are in any
way successful at achieving that. There was a
documentary, “Living with a Terror Suspect”, on
Channel 4 around the time that control orders first
came out. One of the terrorism suspects on a control
order was allowed to go to five Underground stations.
In my time on a control order, if I had been so inclined
to be involved in terrorism I would have still been
able to have gone and done those things. If somebody
is a dangerous terrorist and we need to protect Britain
from them, you don’t want them on house arrest,
having to go and sign on at a police station once a
day. This is not a correct way of dealing with them
and protecting the British people.

Q415 Michael Ellis: Mr Bullivant, people on bail for
ordinary offences are often required to turn up at
police stations to report, they are often required to
undertake curfews for routine non-terrorist offences.
That is a system that has worked reasonably well. No
system is faultless. You have described not knowing
what was going on, that it has been secret courts and
secret justice. Actually it is nothing of the sort, is it?
What it is is that you don’t like the fact that you had
this order imposed on you—and it is perfectly
understandable from your perspective—but the
authorities had what they believed to be good reasons
to do so.

Cerie Bullivant: How would you describe a justice
system where I was excluded from 90% of the
hearings, where my solicitors were not allowed to go
in and hear the evidence, where I was not allowed
to put a defence forward, as not a secret court, not
secret justice?

Q416 Michael Ellis: You were stopped at Heathrow
Airport, were you not?

Cerie Bullivant: Yes.

Q417 Michael Ellis: Where were you intending to
travel?

Cerie Bullivant: Syria.

Q418 Michael Ellis: Who were you travelling with,
if anyone?

Cerie Bullivant: I was travelling with somebody
called Ibrahim Adam.

Q419 Michael Ellis: Was that person the subject of
any interest from the police or security authorities?
Cerie Bullivant: I had no way of knowing at the time.

Q420 Michael Ellis: Do you know now?

Cerie Bullivant: I know now that his brother was on
remand for a crime.

Q421 Michael Ellis: When you learnt about that, that
perhaps gave you some insight into why the police
had stopped you from travelling to Syria.

Cerie Bullivant: At that time I was already on a
control order.

Q422 Michael Ellis: As far as the general principle
is concerned, although you say that the courts have
erred in imposing this control order on you, isn’t the
reality of the matter that the police and security
services need some measure by which to restrict the
movements of people against whom they have
reasonably strong suspicions of serious terrorist
intent?

Cerie Bullivant: If there are reasonable signs that
someone is involved in serious terrorism intent then
they are going to be committing a crime. Since 9/11
a whole raft of new legislation has been brought in
criminalising a wide range of new areas of crime. You
cannot get involved in dangerous terrorism-related
activities without committing crimes. It is not
possible. The police need to do a thorough job and if
these people are dangerous they need to be in prison.
Michael Ellis: Would you not accept that there are
people who are put on bail conditions all the time who
are subsequently acquitted at court? It does not mean
the fact that they were on bail pending their case was
wrong in principle.

Chair: We need to move on, and I think we
understand perfectly what you were saying, Mr
Bullivant.

Q423 Dr Huppert: There are a number of things and
we will come to some of them later. Apologies again
for being late. There have been two particular issues
that have been challenged over the current regime,
things that people want to bring back from control
orders, one of which was the internal exile, which you
touched on earlier. The other was the fact that it used
to be possible to have a control order for an indefinite
period. Do you think that either of those would be
effective compared to the effects they have on
somebody subjected, perhaps wrongfully, to one of
these orders?

Cerie Bullivant: It is worth knowing that from my
perspective at least, and from the perspective of
groups like Liberty, when you analyse the differences
between control orders and TPIMs, on the vast
majority of issues they are exactly the same. It is
largely a rebranding exercise between two measures.
How your life is affected living under them is the
exactly the same. The major thing that was removed
was the relocation. I would like to quote what Lord
Macdonald QC said in a report for the Government
about relocation. He said, “This is a form of internal
exile, which is utterly inimical to traditional British
norms. In the absence of any intention to charge, still
less to prosecute, no British citizen should be told by
the Government where he may or may not live. The
review is clearly right to recommend the abolition of
this thoroughly offensive practice. It is
disproportionate and there is no justification for its

Ev 58 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

14 January 2014 Cerie Bullivant

retention.” If the best that we can do when we bring
in a new piece of legislation is pat ourselves on the
back that we got rid of a thoroughly offensive practice
that has no justification for its retention then I think
we have done quite poorly.

Q424 Dr Huppert: On the other issue about the
longevity, there has been a lot of questions. There was
an article in the Telegraph last week saying that
limiting these to only two years was an incredible risk
and sacrificing the safety of British people. As I think
you know from my responding article, I don’t agree
with that. What is your take on that? You have argued
that people have not had strong evidence against them.
How do you think of two years as a time period
compared to an indefinite order?

Cerie Bullivant: Compared to an indefinite order, it is
good that there is some sort of limit to it. It is sad
that they can be extended on the basis of more secret
evidence. As Michael Ellis was saying, it is
sometimes the case that people who are accused of
crimes have a certain loss of liberty until their case
can be proven. The problem with TPIMs is that there
is no case being made or no move towards gaining a
prosecution or gaining a final solution. You are
basically just putting a situation on ice for a period of
time. Some may say two years is too long; it is
definitely better than indefinite.

Q425 Mr Winnick: Before I ask you any questions,
let me say that your comments about control orders
are not lost on some of us; the point that you made
that if there is any action to be taken against someone
because of suspected criminal activity the law should
take its course in the ordinary way. Your words
certainly have been heard.

Cerie Bullivant: Thank you very much.

Mr Winnick: You are a convert to the Islamic
religion. Do you accept, whatever weaknesses we may
have in a democracy, that one of the fundamental
rights of a country, based on the rule of law, is to be
able to uphold one’s religion, to change one’s religion
or, as in a case like mine, to have absolutely no
religion whatsoever? Do you accept that should be the
case insofar as is possible in every place?

Cerie Bullivant: Yes, I definitely agree. I think that
the right to self-determination and the right to have
freedom in how we choose to live our lives, as long
as we are not causing harm or distress to other people,
is one of the most important things that any society
can hold on to. I hope that despite the rumblings about
future legislation that we have been hearing, those
rights for people to practise their religion freely, or no
religion at all freely, are still maintained in this
country, as they have been and as they were when I
was growing up.

Q426 Mr Winnick: You were going to Syria
obviously because you feel very strongly about the
brutality of the Assad regime.

Cerie Bullivant: That was 2006. At that time, to be
honest, I had very little awareness of the situation of,
for example, the Assad regime and those sorts of
things. The primary purpose of my travelling—I was
21, 22 at the time—was I had a bag full of toys and

flat footballs and I wanted to go and work with
orphans. The thing that shocked and that I was aware
of was the disparity in wealth between the poorest
people in those areas and the richest and I wanted to
go and see another culture, see the history—I love
history—and basically work with young children, and
teach English to sustain myself during that time.

Q427 Mr Winnick: Given your earlier answer about
the right to pursue one’s religion or change one’s
religion, are you concerned that some of those who
are fighting the Assad regime, which undoubtedly is a
very brutal regime to say the least, are very intolerant
and some of those forces have been exposed who
obviously want to bring about a system where no one
could change their religion and anyone who does not
practise that religion would be punished accordingly?
Cerie Bullivant: I strongly oppose the Assad regime
and the brutal crimes that he has committed against
his own people. Equally, though, I am no fan of any
sectarian activities and wars. I think that there is no
good to be had from any situation where one group of
people kill another group of people on the basis of
their religion.

Q428 Mr Winnick: It is sometimes said, and it may
well be totally wrong, that those who convert, not just
to Islam but to Christianity or Judaism or what have
you, tend to take a more fundamentalist line,
particularly it is emphasised as those who have
converted to Islam in the last few years. Do you think
that there is any foundation for that argument?

Cerie Bullivant: I have seen no studies or statistical
evidence to show that there is any more predilection
among converts to get into any sort of fundamental
version of Islam. Many converts I know follow the
Sufi branch of Islam and are very apolitical and
spiritual. I think that every man makes his own path.
One of the fundamental aspects of Islam is the concept
of ummah and caring for your fellow man in every
country and every place. When some people take on
that concept of caring for everyone in every place it
becomes painful for them to then see people who they
consider brothers and sisters being bombed and killed
in other countries as well.

Q429 Paul Flynn: One of the sections of the judge’s
words that my colleague failed to read out was that he
said, “For the reasons I have given in this and in the
closed judgment, I am not prepared to uphold the
present order, nor would I have upheld the previous
order”. This completely exonerates you, doesn’t it?
Cerie Bullivant: Yes. I was very happy with the
judgment of the judge and everything that he said.
He repeated three times that there were no reasonable
grounds for suspicion that I had ever been involved in
terrorism-related activities.

Q430 Paul Flynn: It has been suggested by my
colleague Michael Ellis that the control orders were
essential and something that was universally approved
of in this House. Do you recall at the time that they
were bitterly opposed in this House as being illiberal,
unnecessary, an overreaction and something that was
designed to grab favourable headlines for the

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 59

14 January 2014 Cerie Bullivant

politicians involved as appearing to be tough on
terrorism?

Chair: Order. Could Mr Flynn put his question,
please?

Paul Flynn: I was in the House at the time. Mr Ellis
was not.

Cerie Bullivant: I agree with you that both control
orders and TPIMs are largely exercises in flexing the
muscles and showing how strong people can be on
terrorism, when in fact they are measures that do very
little to protect us and alienate the Muslim community
and make them feel like a second-rate suspect
community. I feel that it is very important that we
learn the lessons from the past. My family have Irish
roots and I think no one would say now that
internment was the most effective tool for dealing
with the IRA. In fact the more you go down these
draconian paths, the more you try to close things
down, the more you are going to push people towards
becoming more extreme against you. The better path
I would propose would be to open up discussion of
ideas and let the truth win out by the quality of its
truth, if that makes any sense.

Q431 Paul Flynn: You knew a friend of a friend of
someone about whom there might have been some
questions, there was a drunken phone call from
someone who had not been in touch with you since
you became converted, and this was the basis of an
attempt to deprive you of your liberty.

Cerie Bullivant: They were the only two things that I
have been told about, yes.

Q432 Paul Flynn: Just the last question, was there
ever any attempt to de-radicalise you at any time?
Cerie Bullivant: No. In my interactions with the
security services, I have never been asked about
involvement in terrorism. My interactions with the
Home Office have been that even when the judge gave
his initial ruling, before it became a written judgment
and it became the law, he said at the end of the hearing
in December that he would be quashing the order, he
would not be opening any grounds for appeal and the
order would be quashed. He said that when it came
down as a written judgment then it would become the
ruling and the law, but he told everyone before that
that would be the case. Even then the Home Office
refused to reduce the conditions of my control order
or even acknowledge that they had been wrong to do
it in the first place.

Q433 Paul Flynn: Do you accept that at the time
because of fear and so on of what was going on the
authorities did behave in an hysterical way that was
understandable and the feeling was that everyone was
assumed to be guilty unless they were proved to be
a Christian?

Chair: If you could make your answer as brief as
possible, please.

Cerie Bullivant: Yes. I think you are right that there
was an immense amount of fear around at the time,
but if we are going to look at best practice here then
the case of Anders Breivik and the reaction of Norway
is a much better place to look. If we act through fear

then we are only going to create fear in other
communities as well and a society of fear.

Q434 Chair: Do you come across people who want
to go abroad to act as foreign fighters? Have you come
across people like that?

Cerie Bullivant: I have, yes.

Chair: We accept that you are not one. Do you know
why they do this?

Cerie Bullivant: Generally speaking, from the people
that I have spoken to—and this is a very large issue
within the Muslim community at the moment—as I
said there is a concept of ummah within the religion
of the universality of human brotherhood. Within that
context, when people see that civilians are being killed
with TNT, dynamite bombs, barrels of chemical
weapons being dropped, phosphorous being used on
playgrounds, as we saw on Panorama—

Chair: They want to go and defend them because of
the concept of ummah.

Cerie Bullivant: The primary thing that I have heard
from people is that it is about defending other
innocent people around the world.

Q435 Chair: Do you endorse what they are doing?
Do you understand that as a legitimate way of taking
Islam forward?

Cerie Bullivant: I think that what is happening in
Syria especially at the moment is a hugely
complicated issue. To go into it now—

Chair: We don’t want you to talk about Syria, but do
you understand why people do this and do you
endorse what they do?

Cerie Bullivant: I understand what their thinking is
and where they are taking their thoughts from. I think
that in all of these situations there is a multitude of
different groups and aspects and ways of going around
solving things and I can understand why someone
would choose to do that.

Q436 Dr Huppert: Can I go to the criminal trial that
you faced for breaching the control order? Apologies
if this was covered before I got here. You had seven
counts of breaching and the jury decided to find you
not guilty. You said that you had breached the control
order. What do you think it says that 12 people
presumably felt that the process was so unfair that
despite the fact you said you had breached it, they
nonetheless insisted on finding you not guilty?

Cerie Bullivant: Those seven counts that I was
actually tried for were test counts. There were over 45
breaches and for the vast majority of those I didn’t
say that any of them didn’t happen. I accepted every
single one of them, but the fact was that a jury of 12
ordinary decent people realised that the measures and
the pressure that it put upon me, as I was saying
before—I don’t know if you were here then—having
those conditions above you is like a sword hanging
over your neck. That pressure and high anxiety of
living in that situation led to a situation where there
was no alternative but for those breaches to happen.
The jury, which as was said before is a cornerstone of
British justice, saw that no crime had been committed
in breaching that order, I believe rightly so.

Ev 60 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

14 January 2014 Cerie Bullivant

Michael Ellis: Mr Bullivant, just to explain that Mr
Vaz has had to go to another Committee so I am acting
as Chair.

Q437 Nicola Blackwood: I wanted to follow up on
some of the comments you made about meeting
individuals who felt like they might go off to other
countries and join fighting. We are conducting an
inquiry into counter-terrorism and one of the issues
that we are interested in is methods of radicalisation.
In the work subsequent to the quashing of your control
order have you come across some of these methods
of radicalisation? Do you think it is more likely that
individuals are coming across radicalising material
online or in mosques or at university or by other
methods? What is your assessment of this?

Cerie Bullivant: Strangely enough, the thing that
radicalises people the most and straight off the bat is
not in the mosques or online. It is on the BBC. Every
day when people turn on their TVs and read their
newspapers they see these things going on. We live in
a global world and a connected world and it is
impossible that it is not going to affect them somehow.
The question then becomes how do they channel that,
and ironically the talk of shutting speakers down and
these sorts of things are going to force them into going
into darker places to look for solutions and searching
the internet where they are going to see things that are
much worse than anything you will ever find being
preached in any mosque. I think at the moment the
larger sort of push for this, there is this idea that
radicalisation is coming from a religious point of
view, that there is a certain preacher or a certain
group. Obviously there is a certain amount of that
coming out from—

Q438 Nicola Blackwood: I think the thing is, Mr
Bullivant, if I looked at the BBC and saw the images
that we have all seen of the terrible suffering of the
Syrian people and I felt like I wanted to do something
I wouldn’t know where to start to go and join a Syrian
militia. Somehow you have to find that out. The
question I am asking is where are these young people
finding the information that is enabling them to go
and fight? It must be somewhere. It can’t just be from
the ether.

Cerie Bullivant: In the case of Syria specifically, it is
on the border of Turkey. I have heard of young lads
who don’t know anyone or anything basically buying
a plane ticket to Istanbul and heading off on their own.
It is not like, for example, in Afghanistan where
someone would need to hook into a network and know
people X, Y and Z. It is why the position in Syria
is so different to other theatres because it is just so
easily accessible.

Q439 Nicola Blackwood: With Syria they get on a
plane and they head for a border but with other
theatres they have to find contacts. How would they
find those contacts? Have you come across any
individuals who have done that?

Cerie Bullivant: I wouldn’t know the specifics of how
you organised something like that.

Nicola Blackwood: I was just wondering if in your
work you had come across that.

Cerie Bullivant: When it comes to people arranging
to go somewhere like Afghanistan to get involved
with maybe a group like the Taliban, for example,
there is no mosque in the country now that would
preach that or support that. There is nowhere you
could go openly and talk about these things. That
situation does not exist in this country anywhere and
anybody who tells you anything different is fibbing,
to be honest. How people do it has to be through
personal contacts and personal connections that they
already have. I don’t know a great deal about that.
That is not my area of expertise and I wouldn’t want
to talk any more—

Q440 Nicola Blackwood: One of the issues that has
been raised with us is that a common location for
radicalisation is in prison. During the time that you
were held in remand, were you in any way exposed?
You said not to de-radicalisation, but did anybody
approach you during that period to try to make the
most of any grievance that you might feel, as it turns
out justifiably?

Cerie Bullivant: When I was in prison, the reaction
that I saw from the Muslim prisoners, the situation
that I was in, was that they were generally speaking
the most helpful of the prisoners, not just to other
Muslims but to the non-Muslim prisoners as well.
They would be the ones that would share their drink
and food. I saw people giving dawah, I saw people
calling to Islam, and I saw a lot of people converting
while they were in prison. I did not see people calling
for jihad in prison. I think that everybody in prison
knows that that would be a very quick way to get your
sentence extended. I was in a remand prison as well.
No one would want to make their case any worse than
it already was. I know of one other person who was
on a control order case and the fact that he had spoken
to some people about Islam and they had chosen to
accept Islam was brought up as evidence against him
in his control order hearing, that he had been allegedly
radicalising people in prison.

If you want to go into the brand of Islam in prison, it
is generally speaking quite orthodox, quite Salafi, if
you want to coin a term, but there is certainly nobody
there who has the gumption to start telling you, “As
soon as you get out you need to head off to
Afghanistan”, because it would be a madness in
prison.

Michael Ellis: Thank you very much, Mr Bullivant.
If there are no other questions from my colleagues,
thank you very much for taking the time to come in
to see this Committee today and give evidence. It has
been very helpful and interesting and the Committee
appreciate it. Thank you for coming in.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 61

Examination of Witness

Witness: Nigel Inkster, International Institute for Strategic Studies, former Director of Operations, Secret
Intelligence Service MI6, gave evidence.

Q441 Michael Ellis: Mr Inkster, thank you very
much indeed for coming in. I am going to start by
asking you to identify a little bit about your
background and why you believe you are before this
Committee today.

Nigel Inkster: My current title is Director of
Transnational Threats and Political Risk at the
International Institute for Strategic Studies, which is
a think-tank specialising in international security and
issues of conflict.

Q442 Michael Ellis: Where were you before that?
Nigel Inkster: Prior to that I was in the British Secret
Intelligence Service, retiring as the Assistant Chief at
the end of 2006.

Q443 Michael Ellis: You were previously Assistant
Chief of MI6 as it is sometimes called. Is that right?
Nigel Inkster: Yes.

Q444 Michael Ellis: I think you have been quoted,
Mr Inkster, as having said with reference to the
Snowden leaks that they were embarrassing,
uncomfortable and unfortunate, but you said that it
was likely that most targets of GCHQ were already
well aware of their capabilities. Does this mean that
you disagree with the suggestion that the Snowden
revelations were detrimental to national security?
Nigel Inkster: No, I do not in the slightest. I believe
they were clearly very detrimental to national security
and I think the most important thing to say about that
is that as the scope of Snowden’s leakages has become
evident, the extent of that damage has become all the
greater. It is much more serious than I think I at least
was inclined to infer.

Q445 Michael Ellis: Can you expand on why you
think they have been so damaging?

Nigel Inkster: I think from a number of different
points of view. It is important to bear in mind that
details about the capabilities that Snowden has been
divulging, making public, have been developed in
relatively recent times and reflect the rapid
developments in the world of information and
communication technologies with which the
intelligence services—

Michael Ellis: I wonder if I can just stop you in mid-
flow there, Mr Inkster. The Division bell is going. The
Committee is suspended for a House of Commons
division for 10 minutes. We will come back to you,
Mr Inkster.

Sitting suspended for a Division in the House.

On resuming—

Q446 Michael Ellis: The Committee is now quorate.
I am going to ask you, Mr Inkster, to carry on where
you left off. You were expanding on why it is you
believe that serious damage was done by the
Snowden leaks.

Nigel Inkster: As I said, if you look at the pace of
development in the information and communication
and technology industry, this has been extremely

rapid, and the number of communications options that
are available to individuals and groups is expanding
and changing all the time. Of course, all of this has
happened not at the behest of or on behalf of the
intelligence services of the Western world. They have
had to try to keep pace with this explosive growth as
best they can and it has been a real challenge for them,
but that I think they have met remarkably well, using
a combination of different techniques.

The real value of the capabilities that have emerged
over the last five or six years is that they appear to
provide quite a wide range of coverage of the
communications options and create in the minds of
potential malefactors significant ambiguity and
uncertainty about which channels of communication
might be safe and which channels of communication
are likely to be monitored. That ambiguity, that
uncertainty, has been very significantly eroded and I
think serious malefactors now have a much better idea
of which communication techniques they should not
be using.

Q447 Michael Ellis: In other words, it is your strong
contention that the Snowden leaks have made it a lot
easier for malefactors, as you call them, those
intending to do harm, to go about their unlawful
business and their criminal intent?

Nigel Inkster: I think we need to make a distinction
between those at the kind of low end of the spectrum
who, not to mince words, are stupid and are going to
get caught anyway versus the ones we really need to
worry about, who are not stupid and are extremely
calculating, extremely aware of ICT capabilities.
Those are the ones who are in a better position as a
result of what has occurred.

Michael Ellis: They are sophisticated.

Nigel Inkster: They are more sophisticated actors,
yes.

Q448 Michael Ellis: There are those that have
suggested what GCHQ and NSA want is effectively
something tantamount to a surveillance state and have
referenced spying on everybody, the general public.
What do you say to those who position themselves in
that way?

Nigel Inkster: This is a completely unrealistic and
misleading representation of what has been taking
place. I think such comments betray a fundamental
misunderstanding of the nature of big data and the
role that this plays in modern—

Q449 Michael Ellis: Do you mean we do not even
have the ability to handle the amount of data that is
produced? Is that—

Nigel Inkster: No, that is not my point at all. My
point is that big data has a quality of its own. That
quality is that it enables analytics of big data to
identify patterns of correlation that are simply not
obvious with lesser quantities of data. For example,
why did the intelligence services of various European
countries provide significant quantities of data from
their own national telecommunications to NSA?

Ev 62 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

14 January 2014 Nigel Inkster

Answer: because NSA, by aggregating this up with
other data, can make much more sensible use of it
than could be done by using the lesser quantities. The
point about all of this is that the aim of the NSA and
GCHQ programmes is not to be able to spy on
everybody. What they are doing is putting through
sophisticated computer programmes huge quantities
of data, with the computer being tasked to look for
very, very narrow issues on which it has been
programmed to register. Once that has been done, if
the agencies wish to dig down deeper and look at what
is in those communications, they have to seek a
separate warrant for that.

Q450 Michael Ellis: Finally from me, what do you
say to Sir John Sawers, the current Head of MI6, when
he said before another committee, the Intelligence and
Security Committee, that terrorists were rubbing their
hands with glee about the Snowden leaks? Do you
agree with that assessment?

Nigel Inkster: I think Sir John is probably better
placed than I to make that judgment, but I certainly
think that, as you put it, the more sophisticated end of
the terrorism spectrum, there will be, at the very least,
relief that there is greater certainty about where the
risk lies for them.

Q451 Dr Huppert: Mr Inkster, can I turn on to the
issues about oversight of the agencies and how they
work? Even before any of this came up in 2010, you
said to the Intelligence and Security Committee that
there is evident dissatisfaction with the oversight
arrangements, existing arrangements still do not
command public confidence and highlighted that
citizens have a very direct interest in intelligence and
security and a legitimate desire to know more about
what is being done in this arena. Do you still agree
with those comments?

Nigel Inkster: Can you remind me where I said that?
Dr Huppert: Survival, 52.2, April 2010, page 199.
Nigel Inkster: All right, yes. I think that there is
always going to be this tension with oversight
arrangements in relation to intelligence. By definition,
there are certain aspects of this activity that simply
cannot be made public; to make them public would
be to vitiate their effectiveness. People are always
going to want more from the oversight arrangements
of the intelligence community than those
arrangements are likely to be able to give. We need to
bear in mind that in the overall scheme of things,
political oversight, democratic oversight of the
intelligence services in this country is a relatively
recent phenomenon; it did not get going until 1994. It
is worth reminding ourselves it was the intelligence
services themselves who asked for this. It was not
imposed upon them. The nature of that oversight has
evolved over time and I think has changed quite
significantly. We now see the current committee
having been given increased powers, increased
resources and I expect this process to continue to
evolve.

Q452 Dr Huppert: Do you think it now does
command public confidence in the way that it did not
three years ago?

Nigel Inkster: It depends what you mean by “public
confidence”. I think there will be—

Dr Huppert: But they are your words.

Nigel Inkster:—a vociferous element, the chattering
classes, for want of a better word, who are likely never
to find these arrangements satisfactory. I think we
have seen a lot of evidence of that in the context of
the Snowden revelations. As to the bulk of the British
public, I suspect that they are in the main probably
not that interested.

Q453 Dr Huppert: When you said a new compact
needs to be worked out, what was the new compact
you were thinking of, because while there have been
small changes to the ISC, they are not hugely
substantial. It does not sound to me like the sort of
new compact that I read in that article you wrote.
Nigel Inkster: If I meant anything by a new compact,
I meant an acceptance and an understanding that
certain things could not be made public, but that
would not be a comment on the quality of the
oversight, simply that the public would need to accept
that in exchange for an acceptable level of oversight
and an acceptable arrangement, some things would
have to remain secret.

Q454 Dr Huppert: I will have to try later to match
your words now with that article, but can I turn to
a specific example of oversight? You are presumably
familiar with section 94 of the Telecommunications
Act 1984, “Directions in the interests of national
security”?

Nigel Inkster: Not in detail, no.

Michael Ellis: Perhaps you could expand, Dr
Huppert.

Dr Huppert: It is a section of the Act that says, “The
Secretary of State can give people directions of a
general character as appear to be necessary in the
interests of national security or relations with a
government of a country or territory outside the
United Kingdom”. They have complete carte blanche
to direct any telephone company, anybody covered by
the Telecommunications Act, to do anything. There is
a clause that says, “The Secretary of State has to lay
before each House of Parliament a copy of every
direction”, unless they think that is against the
interests of national security or relations with the
government of a country or territory outside the
United Kingdom or the commercial interests of any
person and money can be paid. It applies to Ofcom
and all providers of public electronic communications
networks. There is nothing mentioned here about
oversight or scrutiny. This is quite a huge power, to
do anything, particularly when it is, “Relations with a
government of a country outside the United
Kingdom”. You must have come across this in your
time at MI6.

Nigel Inkster: No. You would be surprised to learn
that I did not. This was not something that featured in
my preoccupations, and in any case, I think it would
be very difficult for me to talk in that sort of
specificity about what I was involved in while I was
in the intelligence services.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 63

14 January 2014 Nigel Inkster

Q455 Dr Huppert: But in general terms, would you
expect for a power like that, which has no constraints,
as written? There is to be consultation, but everything
must be kept private, everything goes to Parliament,
unless it is in the interests of another country not to
do so, which basically means nothing ever comes to
us. Are you surprised by that? Do you think there
should be some sort of oversight mechanism, some
sort of parliamentary accountability?

Nigel Inkster: It depends what for. If we are talking
about the bulk collection of overseas communications
data, then I think that is something, to my
understanding, that the ISC is well aware of, in fact. I
think Hazel Blears last year made the point in respect
of GCHQ’s bulk collection programmes the
committee was well aware of what programmes were
being undertaken, what had been done to look at them
and had been given extensive briefing about them, so
if we are talking about what GCHQ is doing by way
of bulk overseas collections, I think the understanding
is there.

Dr Huppert: Different members of the ISC have said
different things. I have further questions, but I will
allow others.

Michael Ellis: Perhaps we will come back to you, Dr
Huppert. Mr Winnick.

Q456 Mr Winnick: You have just now referred—
or at least a few moments ago—and used the term
“chattering classes”. Would that be your description
of those who have taken an extensive interest in
Snowden’s revelations?

Nigel Inkster:	Perhaps. There are different

constituencies who have taken an interest in
Snowden’s revelations, though I think speaking purely
subjectively, I sense a degree of media weariness with
some of this. I think that civil liberties groups are
bound to take an active interest in this.

Q457 Mr Winnick: Any reason why they should
not?

Nigel Inkster: None at all, none at all, but I think the
difficulty is that sometimes the debates that we are
seeing are still being characterised by misperceptions
that have taken hold within the media. In fact, I have
written an article about this for the forthcoming
edition of the IISS in-house magazine, Survival, which
highlights what I think some of these key
misperceptions are. I would be happy to share a draft
of that with your staff.

Michael Ellis: Please do send it in.

Nigel Inkster: I think of course it is entirely legitimate
for people to want to understand whether the civil
liberties of British people are being respected, of
course it is, and I could hardly say otherwise.

Q458 Mr Winnick: In a society based on the rule of
law, which presumably you are as keen and
enthusiastic about as the rest of us—you did your stint
for a long number of years and presumably doing your
utmost to make sure that we remain a society based
on the rule of law and against any attempt to terrorise
the people in this country—don’t you think it is useful
that papers like the Guardian and Liberty, the
organisation, and the rest should be extremely

concerned over the amount of intelligence-gathering
that has been demonstrated by the Snowden
revelations?

Nigel Inkster: Not necessarily. I think that we are
looking at a situation here in which the capabilities
that have been developed have been a response to a
particular crisis, which at the time was perceived as a
major crisis, the threat from a globally-enabled and
globally-deployed terrorist movement capable of
doing significant damage, and a movement whose
emergence coincided with these technical capabilities
that we are talking about and whose activities were
significantly enabled by these technical capabilities. In
the circumstances, it would be rather surprising if the
intelligence services had not sought to try to get some
kind of assurance of visibility where this mattered.

I think the issues that concern civil liberties groups in
this country derive from the fact that these
programmes have necessarily been secret. Although I
think there is certainty in conviction within the
intelligence community and within Government that
the programmes were conducted lawfully, in
accordance with the laws that exist, it is inevitably the
case when intelligence services are concerned that
they are seeking to apply the law in difficult
circumstances, conditions that had never been
envisaged by the law-makers, where there is no
precedent, and where you are always going to be on
the leading edge of jurisprudence and there is no safe
centre. This is always going to be a contentious area.

Q459 Mr Winnick: In the United States, there has
been a considerable amount of debate, including a
criticism from those who previously offended to the
hilt, the US intelligence gathering, and criticism has
now been levelled at the amount of gathering that has
been revealed. Don’t you think that is a healthy aspect
and would never have come about without Snowden
doing what he did do?

Nigel Inkster: I am not sure that we can say that with
confidence. I think that at some point some of these
issues would have had to come out. I am not sure
that the way in that Snowden has gone about this is
necessarily the right way to do it, and it is not obvious
to me why Mr Snowden is better qualified than
anyone else to judge what intelligence programmes
the United States Government should be running.

Q460 Mr Winnick: Last question, if I may, Chair.
Does the name Daniel Ellsberg mean anything to you?
Nigel Inkster: Yes.

Q461 Mr Winnick: You know of course that Mr
Ellsberg revealed the Pentagon papers regarding the
Vietnam War that caused a huge outcry at the time,
the denunciation of him as a traitor and the rest of it,
now considered in a somewhat different light. He has
said that Snowden has followed his example and has
praised Snowden. Do you gather anything from that?
Nigel Inkster: I think my views on Mr Snowden are
of little consequence, as I think now is Mr Snowden
himself. He is simply a vector through which these
revelations have been made and at this point I do not
think he has any further relevance. I would simply

Ev 64 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

14 January 2014 Nigel Inkster

point out that Daniel Ellsberg did not seek asylum in
Russia, he stayed to face the music.

Q462 Nicola Blackwood: I wanted to change
direction of the discussion slightly to discuss links
between terrorism and drugs trafficking. I know that
this is a subject on which you have written. I
understand that there are emerging significant links
between terror groups and drugs trafficking in North-
West Africa and that there have been reports of
smugglers adopting religious or jihadist rhetoric in
order to justify the fight against security services and
also perhaps to recruit drugs mules. I wonder if you
believe that the overseas capacity-building and the
work that the UK has been doing in order to try to
work on these issues is sufficient and effective?

Nigel Inkster: I think that what we are seeing in North
Africa and the Sahel in particular is a manifestation
of a wider phenomenon, which is a security situation
in which insurgency, terrorism and criminal activity
co-exist to varying degrees and different entities
become involved in any and all of these activities,
depending on the circumstances. That is certainly
what we are seeing in the Sahel, and that is an area in
particular where smuggling high-value goods has been
a way of life for generations, in the absence of any
credible alternatives.

It is not just a phenomenon that is restricted to Africa
and the Sahel. We have seen it, for example, in parts
of Latin America, where FARC, the main insurgent
and terrorist movement, has also been a prime mover
in the narcotics trade. That phenomenon undoubtedly
does exist. The person who was responsible for last
year’s In Amenas attack was primarily a kind of
smuggler/jihadist—emphasis on smuggler—until he
refocused his attention towards a more ideological
approach. The phenomenon is very real and it does
present a particular difficulty for both these parts of
the world, which actively suffer the most damage
from terrorism.

If you look at the statistics for the last couple of years,
by far the majority of terrorist attacks and terrorist
casualties have taken place in these remote and
ungoverned areas like Nigeria, like the Sahel, Pakistan
and Afghanistan. It also poses a dilemma for
developed Western states, who have much better
capabilities and institutions to deal with the problem
of terrorism as it affects them, but faced with the
dilemma of what to do about the problems that we see
in places like the Sahel, because there is always a risk
that if you become involved directly in these security
situations, you risk either making them worse or
inviting blow-back on yourself, so making a judgment
about where and how to intervene is very difficult.

Q463 Nicola Blackwood: Mr Inkster, I am aware
that we have counter-terrorism and extremism liaison
officers, we have a network of those in particular
flashpoints.

Nigel Inkster: Yes, sure.

Nicola Blackwood: We also have SOCA liaison
officers who are deployed to deal with specific areas
of concern regarding drugs trafficking, and of course
East Africa would qualify quite highly for that. We
also have a justice and human rights partnership

programme, which is put in place to try to raise the
quality of justice and security practice in certain
countries of concern and make sure that the emphasis
is on building evidence-based cases against suspects.
I suppose what I am looking for is an assessment of
whether you think this network of overseas effort is
effective or whether we should be trying to focus on
alternative approaches.

Nigel Inkster: I think the general approach is the best
approach that is on offer. It enables you to engage,
hopefully with some effect, in the areas concerned
without yourself having to put boots on the ground, to
the point where you become a major actor and
influence the situation. Yes, in principle I think it is a
good idea. In practice, much depends on the specific
circumstances and much depends upon the resources
that have been deployed relative to the severity of the
threat, and that is of course a judgment that has to be
made. There is no reliable formula to tell you how to
do that. Where the UK is concerned, my
understanding is that in the main, the United Kingdom
focus is to work with partners rather than alone. There
are these arrangements that you cite. I think they are
fine as far as they go. I have two possible concerns.
One is that they may be under-resourced, given the
scale of the problem. The number of SOCA officers
that are deployed in this rather large and insecure
region is pretty small. Secondly, I do wonder about the
possible downside of a stovepipe approach, whereby
SOCA only deals with organised crime, does not stray
into terrorism and has no remit for insurgency and I
wonder whether the approach that is being taken is a
broad enough focus to encompass the totality of the
security threat that presents in these areas.

Nicola Blackwood: Thank you very much.

Q464 Paul Flynn: In 2006, long after Osama bin
Laden had left Afghanistan and the al-Qaeda left
Afghanistan, when only two British soldiers had been
killed in combat, the British Government decided to
go into Helmand Province in the hope that not a shot
would be fired, and their mission was to end the drugs
trade. Did this have the support of the security
services at the time and how successful was that?
Nigel Inkster: Of course when you say the support of
the intelligence services, in terms of a recognition that
this mission was going to go ahead and would need
to be provided with intelligence support—

Q465 Paul Flynn: Did they support the view that not
a shot would be fired—

Nigel Inkster: No, I do not think so.

Paul Flynn:—and that drugs would be eliminated?
Nigel Inkster: No, I do not think we did. As to the
drugs problem, I think the drugs problem in
Afghanistan was far more severe and intractable than
anyone had imagined when the United Kingdom first
took responsibility for this. There was a reluctance to
recognise that the agendas of counter-insurgency and
counter-narcotics run counter to each other, which I
now firmly believe they do.

Q466 Paul Flynn: The Intelligence and Security
Service Committee here, and all other committees
involved in defence—and presumably the security

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 65

14 January 2014 Nigel Inkster

services—were also cheerleaders for the view that
Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction that
were a threat to Britain. Doesn’t this suggest that we
need better knowledge and better information of the
kind that came from Edward Snowden? I am putting
to you that the last two disasters we have had, the Iraq
War, fought on an entirely false basis, and the
incursion into Helmand, which cost us 427 lives, in
addition to uncounted Afghanistan lives, were errors.
The security services, which are costing us £2 billion
a year, were part of the belief, the set of ideas, that
led us into those terrible mistakes.

Nigel Inkster: On the Iraq inquiry, I think we can do
no better than await the outcome of Lord Chilcot’s
report.

Q467 Paul Flynn: It is already three years late, as
you know, for reasons—

Nigel Inkster: Indeed, yes. On the Afghan point, can
I make the point that the British military did not go
into Helmand Province on the recommendation of the
intelligence services. They absolutely did not. That
was a decision that they took on their own
recognition.

Q468 Paul Flynn: Do you believe that Angela
Merkel is a threat to the United States or that Turkey
is a threat to the United Kingdom?

Nigel Inkster: That is not a judgment for me to make
and I think it is not for me to second-guess what the—
Paul Flynn: Can you conceive of any reason why we
should be spying on them or why—

Michael Ellis: Mr Flynn, would you just allow Mr
Inkster to answer the question that you put, if he
wishes to go further?

Nigel Inkster: Sorry, which one?

Michael Ellis: Is Angela Merkel a threat to the
United States?

Nigel Inkster: I think that is a judgment for the United
States to make. There is no doubt that there are
significant areas of policy difference between
Germany and the United States. There are areas of
German policy that the United States may have
concerns about or may not feel well-sighted on.
Whether listening to Mrs Angela Merkel’s mobile
phone, if indeed this is what happened, is the best way
to do it, that is not a matter for me to pronounce on.

Q469 Paul Flynn: Don’t you think the rest of we
citizens of Europe are benefiting from the fact that
Edward Snowden has revealed to us that America is
so neurotic that they listen in to Angela Merkel
ordering groceries, and isn’t it right that we have that
information, and should we not applaud Edward
Snowden as a whistle-blower?

Nigel Inkster: Sir, you may. I do not. I regard him as
a traitor and—

Q470 Paul Flynn: Okay. What about the rest of the
information about what happens to ordinary citizens?
Do you think that this is something that we should be
aware of, that every phone call we make, every visit
we pay, that someone can find out where we are, what
we are seeing, who our friends are? It is an outrageous
intrusion into the lives of ordinary citizens in Britain,

of which we were kept in ignorance, and Edward
Snowden has allowed us to know that.

Nigel Inkster: I think this point about the ubiquity of
visibility that comes from modern ICT is more an
issue for the people who have manufactured and
developed these capabilities. After all, it was not the
intelligence services who asked the people who
manufacture this to put GPS into it, to put all these
other capabilities in that enable somebody, if they care
to do so, to know what I am doing and where I am at
almost any time of day or night. It is simply the reality
of the modern ICT world that we have moved
towards, which has not been well-understood, not
been well-appreciated, and I entirely accept that there
is scope for a debate on the way in that these
communications are developing, the implications for
individuals, but I think that the intelligence
component of this can only be one small element in
that debate, not the primary element. The
intelligence services—

Q471 Paul Flynn: A final question: do you think that
the excessive overreaction to what were terrible events
and the way that the Western Christian world seemed
to have demonised the Eastern Islamic world is itself a
cause of antagonism and creating a sense of injustice,
because many of the terrorist atrocities in this country
were home-grown, from people who were brought up
and educated here? If we had had transparency in the
past, rather than feeding on secrecy and living in the
darkness of not knowing what was going on, that has
in fact led to an increase in tension and some of the
absurd injustices, such as the control orders.

Nigel Inkster: I think this is a rather large question
for me to answer in the space of a couple of minutes.
Paul Flynn: You can say yes.

Nigel Inkster: I think the short answer is no, I am not
convinced that that is.

Q472 Michael Ellis: Do you think, Mr Inkster, that
the law enforcement framework has kept up with
technology? You referred to the advances in
technology and your mobile telephone and our mobile
phone GPS connections. Do you think the law
enforcement framework, in other words, the authority
vested in police and law enforcement agencies to do
surveillance on those persons they suspect reasonably
to be terrorists or criminals, has kept up with the
technology?

Nigel Inkster:	Bulk intercept of civilian

communications is not a new phenomenon, it has been
around for some time, and I think the legislation that
we have in this country, and to a large extent in the
United States, has been framed to reflect that
recognition, that bulk intercept is not a new
phenomenon. There have been significant changes in
the legislation here. The Intercept of Communications
Act morphed into the Regulation of Investigatory
Powers Act, as it became evident that these additional
capabilities were required. It is not impossible to
imagine that further legislative changes may be
required at some point in the future.

Q473 Mr Clappison: Can I just change the subject a
little bit? We were hearing in our previous evidence

Ev 66 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

14 January 2014 Nigel Inkster

session about people going from the United Kingdom
to fight in Syria. What concerns do you have about
that?

Nigel Inkster: It is very difficult to say with
confidence what the effect of this in the United
Kingdom is going to be. We have seen this
phenomenon of terrorists moving from this country or
people moving from this country to take part in
military or jihadist-type conflicts in a number of
different places and the impact of that I think has been
different in each case. In the case of Afghanistan and
Pakistan, we know perfectly well what the impact has
been, that a number of people went there to, as they
thought, fight in Afghanistan and were turned back
and sent to undertake attacks in this country. In Iraq,
this did not happen. Most people who went to take
part in jihadi activities in Iraq either were discouraged
and came back home or went on a one-way ticket,
either volunteered or were volunteered to be suicide
bombers, and so simply did not come back. In any
case, I think the leadership of what became the
Islamic state of Iraq was not particularly interested in
orchestrating attacks against the United Kingdom, so
there was no particular imperative to do so.

In the case of Syria, at the moment it is not that
evident to me that the leadership of the various
jihadist groups operating there has a particular animus
against the UK or has a particular imperative to
orchestrate attacks here, although the Metropolitan
Police have recently made some comments to suggest
that this may be happening. For me, the real worry
about Syria is that it has the potential to become the
crucible for a new generation of international
jihadists, rather in the way as happened with those
who took part in the anti-Soviet jihad in the 1980s,
that they become a kind of band of brothers, united
by shared experiences, shared outlooks, shared
ideology, and that they then move on looking for new
forms of jihad to undertake, one of which could well
consist of attacks in countries such as the UK. I think
that is an entirely understandable concern. There is
not a huge amount I think that we can do about it,
other than monitor closely the activities of such
people and have the best understanding we can of who
they are communicating with and what they are saying
and what they are doing.

Q474 Dr Huppert: There are many things I could
come back on, but just one, if I may, Mr Inkster. As
you probably know, a number of the large tech
companies now publish transparency reports—I think
Google started to do this, Microsoft and others—
saying how many requests they have had for data and
how many people that relates to. They do not of
course identify which individuals and I think we agree
that is something that needs to stay private. They and
many others have called for Government and
government agencies to publish similar information,
again not identifying who is being requested, just to
give a sense of scale so that there is the possibility
of scrutiny. Currently for communications data, this
information is published en bloc. I think there were
570,000 data requests last year, but not who made

them. Do you think the Government could do
something like that?

Nigel Inkster: Conceivably they could. Whether it
would be desirable to do so, I am honestly not sure. I
do not know what the answer to this question is. That
is a matter the Government is going to have to make
a judgment about. Are there reasons why this should
not be done in this particular case? I find it very
difficult to answer that question.

Q475 Michael Ellis: Mr Inkster, Snowden is said to
have been one of 850,000 American federal
employees or contractors who had access to national
security data. How could Washington in those
circumstances have been expected to prevent a leak
like this eventually occurring?

Nigel Inkster: I referred to myths and misconceptions
and this is one of those myths and misconceptions.
The number of people in the United States intelligence
community with top-security clearances is 1.4 million,
according to a 2012 report by the National Director
of Intelligence. It is 1.4 million who have top-level
clearances out of a total of 5 million Americans who
have some sort of security clearances. But the number
of people from that 1.4 million who would have had
access to much of the Snowden material will have
been much less. Having access to a particular level
of security classification does not automatically mean
having access to all the data, and having access to the
data does not equate with knowing how that data was
produced. I think that this is a very self-serving
argument that does not stack up. I think within the
American intelligence community there is an issue of
the size that this community has risen to, and in
particular the number of contractors within that
system. I think 70% of the US intelligence budget
currently goes to contractors of one sort or another.

Q476 Michael Ellis: So you think there is an
acceptance that it has gone a bit too far?

Nigel Inkster: I think that there is an acceptance.
There has always been a concern within the more
thoughtful elements of the intelligence community
about the reliance on contractors. There has always
been a concern about the shift that has taken place
post-9/11 from a need to know system to a rather over-
enthusiastic need to share approach and the
breakdown of traditions of compartmentalisation that
needs to be brought back.

Q477 Michael Ellis: Can you say briefly how many
you think in this country have top-level clearance?
Nigel Inkster: I do not know, but it is certainly going
to be a vastly smaller number. You have to understand
that the American system is sui generis and the United
States is a global intelligence power with no peer, so
in that sense comparisons with the UK are perhaps
invidious. But I think here the number is vastly less.
Michael Ellis: Mr Inkster, thank you very much
indeed for coming in. The Committee is very grateful
for your time and for the evidence that you have
given. Thank you very much.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 67

Examination of Witness

Witness: Shiraz Maher, International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation, King’s College London, gave
evidence.

Q478 Michael Ellis: Thank you, Mr Maher, for
coming, and I apologise that we are running a little
bit later than scheduled. It is in part due to a Division
in the House of Commons earlier.

Perhaps you could introduce yourself by saying a little
bit about what you do and what you have done, very
briefly.

Shiraz Maher: My name is Shiraz Maher. I am a
Senior Fellow at the International Centre for the Study
of Radicalisation. That is a research centre within the
War Studies Department at King’s College London. I
am currently leading a team of several researchers,
both in this country and abroad, who are researching
the Syrian conflict.

Q479 Michael Ellis: Thank you very much. In your
position as a Senior Research Fellow at the War
Studies Department, King’s College London, can you
say whether you believe that foreign fighters, as they
are described, pose a real threat to the United
Kingdom?

Shiraz Maher: I believe the picture is still emerging
at this moment in time, but I think we are seeing a
critical mass of people from this country and more
broadly from Europe who are going over to Syria and
participating in the conflict there. I think as the
conflict intensifies and endures, you will begin to see
an increased level of threat in one form or another to
both this country and the Continent.

Q480 Michael Ellis: This is very important, because
I think you made an assessment in October that there
were between 200 and 350 British-linked individuals
who had fought in Syria since the war began. Has the
number risen since then?

Shiraz Maher: We produced a comprehensive set of
figures for what we believe to be the global level of
foreign fighters going over to the conflict. That was
on 17 December. We said the UK figure at the top end
was 366, so it has not risen in any sort of
meaningful way.

Q481 Michael Ellis: When you suggest that there is
a potential danger from foreign fighters to the United
Kingdom, in what way does that danger manifest itself
or could it manifest itself, in your view?

Shiraz Maher: You need to consider a number of
factors arising out of the foreign fighter experience of
young individuals who go over to that country. One
of the key things you are seeing—and I think it was
touched upon in the previous session as well—is the
repopulation, for want of a better phrase, of the
international or global terrorist networks. I think much
of that network has been broken down over the decade
that followed 9/11 and the subsequent anti-terrorist
campaigns, but you are seeing a rather permissive
environment right now within Syria, which is
allowing groups and organisations to essentially
repopulate this network in an international fashion in
newly ungoverned spaces, which would have been
inconceivable just 24 months ago.

You are also going to more broadly then see a new
generation of fighters emerge who have skills that one
would rather they did not have, of course combat
experience, the ability to put together crude and
improvised explosive devices and just—

Q482 Michael Ellis: Do you mean that they might
utilise those skills on returning to the United
Kingdom?

Shiraz Maher: If you look at the pattern of terrorist
activity in this country, again over much of the last
decade, a number of plots that were otherwise put on
to the streets failed for want of the fact that there was
a lack of experience and ability within those cells to
construct viable devices. Unfortunately, you will see
people now gaining those skills in an environment that
is, as I say, permissive to allow them to do so.

Q483 Michael Ellis: Your assessment is that there is
more than 360 of those?

Shiraz Maher: We give both upper estimates and
lower estimates based on of course our open source
work on this, and so at the highest end we would say
366. I would say in all cases, we tend to counsel
against that top-end figure. We believe it is a spread
and I believe we gave a true figure of probably in the
high 200s.

Q484 Mr Winnick: Do you accept that there are
those who wish to go to Syria for the best of reasons,
as they see it, because of the brutality of the Assad
regime, but have not the slightest wish to inflict terror
on their own country, namely Britain?

Shiraz Maher: You are seeing different categories of
people going or different motivations that drive
different individuals for wanting to go over there, but
I think we also need to consider what happens once
individuals are there. I do accept your point that a
number of people have been motivated entirely and
almost purely by humanitarian reasons. They have
been appalled, repulsed by what they have seen as a
humanitarian catastrophe unfolding in that country
and they have gone over. That is not the case in every
scenario. There are certainly young Britons who we
talked to who have gone over from this country who
are participating in that conflict who will say quite
bluntly, for example, “We do not want to free Syria.
We want to establish an Islamic state”. That is a
propaganda poster that has gone around recently and
that is something we are hearing. I am not saying of
course that this is applicable in every case, but I think
you need to broaden out and examine more closely
the various different intentions that might lead
someone there.

I think then to assess what kind of risk or potential
risk a returnee might pose to this country, there are
two things to note. There has been an academic study
in the past by Dr Thomas Hegghammer that looked at
returning foreign fighters from previous conflicts. His
estimate is that one in nine people return post-threat,
so it certainly—

Mr Winnick: One in nine?

Ev 68 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

14 January 2014 Shiraz Maher

Shiraz Maher: One in nine. We need to maybe
examine that figure now in the context of Syria,
because that applies to historical previous conflicts,
and I would think that, for example, if you looked at
the people who went to fight against the Soviet Union,
the narrative and the discourse was quite different to
what it is today. I would posit at least that the global
jihadist narrative is today one that is a lot more
confrontational towards the West.

That leads me to the final point I would just like to
make on this, which is people who may well go into
Syria for all the right reasons, as you say, who are
motivated by purely humanitarian intentions, are not
just of course fighting 24 hours a day on the front
lines. They spend a lot of time being indoctrinated and
going to study groups and so on. What we find from
the ones we are talking to is certainly that if they had
not embraced what you might describe as a global
jihadist ideology before arriving in the country, they
are certainly beginning to embrace that while they are
out there, so that encompasses a lot of ideas that I
think do make them certainly more dangerous than
they would have been.

Q485 Mr Winnick: The Syrian conflict is being seen
increasingly as a sectarian one between the two main
brands of Islam. Those who want to go out, would
they be influenced by an anti-Shia point of view, that
Shia Muslims are not true Muslims, just as so many
centuries ago the endless debates, and indeed terror,
arising from the reformation in this country? Would
that be a factor, that those going out are not only
concerned and indeed disgusted by the brutality of the
Assad regime, but also influenced that his brand of
Muslim is not genuine?

Shiraz Maher: You are right to touch upon the
sectarian element as an element within the conflict
that has grown in prominence. It is certainly very
evident in the discourse of a lot of young men who
go to the country to fight that they are motivated to
some extent by an anti-Shia element. To what extent
that serves as the primary motivation for wanting to
go is very difficult to assess. It is part of the package
certainly of what they believe. That is one of the
things that might be worth certainly considering for
Government, is that one of the core strands of the
Prevent strategy, for example, had been to explain
elements of British foreign policy so as to damp down
some of the tensions that were perceived to be around
that issue that had motivated people to go abroad to
Afghanistan or Iraq. That narrative has changed
somewhat now. It is now more of an intra-Muslim
rather than a civilisation discourse. It is an intra-
Muslim tension that is fuelling a lot of the debate and
anger in communities, so one thing that Parliament,
the Prevent strategy and so on, should be looking into
is how we begin to damp down issues surrounding
these intra-Muslim tensions with Muslim stakeholders
and community groups now, rather than, as I say, the
old narrative, which was the West versus Islam or
something like that.

Q486 Paul Flynn: This estimate you have of 350,
how are they divided between the groups that they

affiliate with? How many of them would go to the al-
Nusra Brigade, how many to the other insurgents and
how many who would support the Government?
Shiraz Maher: From our analysis, by and large you
could identify people joining most of the different
fighting groups out there. I should stress that our work
predominantly focuses on anti-government fighters, so
I could not give an estimate on Shia fighters who may
have gone to support the regime, or indeed even
comment with any great authority on that.

But certainly looking at the anti-Government Sunni
foreign fighters, they do tend to go over and I would
say the single-largest grouping we have found is what
might be called a kind of Islamist foreign legion. It is
called Jaish al-Muhajireen wal Ansar. It operates just
over the border, near the Turkish border, and it seems
to be the single largest grouping where Westerners, a
lot of men from Europe, a lot of men from this
country, seem to go as a port of first call. But we have
found people going to all of the organisations, and
indeed some of those, as you say, are not quite linked
with Jabhat al-Nusra, but ISIS, the Islamic State of
Iraq and al-Sham, which is another one of the more
hard-line al-Qaeda affiliated groups there.

Q487 Paul Flynn: Is there some essential recruiting
organisation in the United Kingdom?

Shiraz Maher: I do not think there is a clear recruiting
organisation. What we have found, and I think what is
becoming increasingly important, is the role of social
media in a lot of this. About 12 months ago, you had
outliers, people who made original trips out to the
country who established themselves there, who made
links with local groups and who established
essentially rat-runs from Syria into Turkey and
backwards and forwards, allowing people to move
between the two countries. They then used social
media to flag up to their friends, to comrades back in
this country to say, “Look, get out to Turkey and then
you can make connections there and we can make it
very easy for you to come”. I do not think recruiting
necessarily takes place on the streets of the UK, but
social media makes that a moot point.

Q488 Paul Flynn: Could you give us some snapshot
of what you believe the motivation of these people
are? Most see the Syrian conflict as one in which there
are massacres, terrible injustices on both sides, a huge
amount of casualties. Do people see this as an
idealistic cause and how?

Shiraz Maher: As I say, you get all kinds of
motivations. We have touched upon the humanitarian
angle, people motivated by humanitarian concerns as
to what is unfolding there. I would also make the point
that there is predominantly as well among young
people a sense of the ummah consciousness, the idea
that all Muslims around the world are united through
some kind of fraternity of the faithful and that
Muslims from one part of the world owe duty,
allegiance and loyalty to other Muslims, particularly
in times of oppression or injustice. I think that is a
message that resonates particularly loudly in the
context of Syria and in a less ambiguous way than it
would have done with the war in Iraq or the war in
Afghanistan. Everyone seems to be on the same page

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 69

14 January 2014 Shiraz Maher

about the brutality of the Syrian regime. There is not
a counter-narrative that is well-established, so as I say,
in the minds of young people I think that idea of the
ummah consciousness on the one hand, coupled with
a sense that this conflict is less morally ambiguous,
less legally contentious seems to make it a quite
attractive proposition.

Q489 Paul Flynn: How firm are your figures for 200
to 250? Is this a realistic calculation?

Shiraz Maher: I believe our figures are realistic. They
have been out there for some time. We have seen that
they are broadly in line with estimates coming out of
intelligence agencies both in this country and across
the Continent. We published figures back in April of
last year as well that were adopted by the EU
Commission on Counter-terrorism, so I would say the
figures have a degree of stability.

Q490 Dr Huppert:	There have been some

fascinating successes with de-radicalisation recently,
people like Tommy Robinson and others were quite a
striking example. Has there been much work to try to
de-radicalise foreign fighters once they have returned
to the UK or is it essentially too late at that point?
Shiraz Maher: I do not think we have as yet seen
enough foreign fighters return and started to have
them back in the UK for a long enough period to
begin to assess even what the implications of their
experience in Syria has meant, let alone to devise a
de-radicalisation strategy. I do think that is something
that Government will need to look at very closely,
again through Prevent, through the Channel project in
terms of recalibrating them to address some of the
issues I mentioned, for example.

It is the intra-Muslim debate that is now taking place
and seems to be adopting greater prominence in the
minds of young people than, as I say, the old
civilisational view that the West is somehow at war
with Islam and they were locked in that. There is need
for a de-radicalisation strategy that is recalibrated and
tailored to the situation emerging from Syria. I think
we do not know enough yet about it and so it is
something that we need to look at.

Q491 Dr Huppert: In general, have de-radicalisation
strategies been sufficiently successful? What more
should be done, if anything?

Shiraz Maher: It is difficult to give an overview of
de-radicalisation strategies as a whole across the
world. There are a number of these schemes
operating.

Dr Huppert: I meant particularly in the UK, sorry.
Shiraz Maher: I think in the UK there have been
variable successes, and again it is very difficult to
know quite where we are looking into this. It is
community-based engagement strategies. I think you
have seen a greater degree of capacity-building within
the Muslim community; you have seen a greater
degree of resilience from civil society, and as I say
again within Muslim-specific contexts. With regards
to prison de-radicalisation strategies, most people go
in for a very long time, so we have not yet seen people
emerge in a meaningful set of numbers where you
could assess that. There is capacity within the

community, but because of Syria evolving in a
different direction, it is not as contentious in the minds
of people as the war in Iraq was, for example, or
Afghanistan.

Q492 Dr Huppert: Things like control orders, which
we were talking about earlier, or schedule 7 stops at
ports, which are disproportionately Muslims coming
back into the country, do you think that collection of
things has led to radicalisation? I certainly hear from
people who feel separated from society as a result. Do
you think that has been a strong effect?

Shiraz Maher: That is certainly part of the narrative
that is out there, and you mentioned control orders,
TPIMs are now the sort of order of the day and they
certainly play a role within the narrative. Quite what
practical effect they are having is not an assessment I
am qualified to make.

Q493 Dr Huppert: Then just lastly from me, if I can,
Chair, overall on the subject of foreign fighters, what
more do you think the Government ought to be doing?
Shiraz Maher: What should the Government do? It
needs to look into three issues. It needs to explore
ways to recalibrate the Prevent and Channel projects
in order to intervene earlier on, before people leave
this country and go to Syria, but also to deal with
them on their return. That is an aspect we have never
traditionally looked at. We have looked at people on
the end of the spectrum who are moving towards
violent extremism and seeking points of intervention,
which is of course correct, but we have never dealt
with this critical mass of numbers of people going
abroad to participate in the conflict who we are then
expecting to return to this country, at least not in the
post-9/11 climate. That is something that needs to be
given urgent consideration.

The aspect of the intra-Muslim debate, as I say, it is
very difficult for Government. Even within Prevent
traditionally, Government was keen to go in and
explain aspects of foreign policy, explain aspects of
domestic intelligence and security policy, where it felt
it could get in and seek to address some of the heat
and tension around those issues. As I say, now
because it is becoming more of an intra-Muslim
debate, Government needs to explore ways to work
with Muslim community partners on the ground again
to build capacity and address those issues and pull
out tensions.

The last issue is certainly something that in our
interactions with people from the police and in
Government who work directly on these issues is that
there is a sense at the moment of there being a rather
crude set of tools available to stop people who want
to go abroad before they go abroad for jihadist
activity. There is stripping of the passports with
prerogative powers and stuff, so we would favour
looking towards encouraging Parliament to move in
with some legislative powers rather than prerogatives,
which could then provide judicial oversight, a clear
procedure and structure in cases where passports need
to be revoked, but essentially to give more powers to
those on our borders to prevent people in the first
place before they go. I think that should be the

Ev 70 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

14 January 2014 Shiraz Maher

emphasis, preventative measures, so we are nipping
the problem before it starts.

Q494 Michael Ellis: Thank you. Mr Maher, you
mentioned very briefly Dr Hegghammer. The
Committee is hearing from Dr Hegghammer and he
will no doubt say something about his report on 11
February, but I think you said he has assessed that
perhaps one in nine of those persons who have gone
to fight in foreign lands and who return pose a threat
to UK national security. Am I right that is what he
says?

Shiraz Maher: Not UK national security, but it was a
general study on—

Michael Ellis: Just pose a threat?

Shiraz Maher: To their home countries.

Q495 Michael Ellis: If we assess that with your
assessment about the lower estimate of 200 foreign
fighters, can one fairly extrapolate from that there is a
threat to the United Kingdom from at least 15 or 20
people? Would that be an accurate assessment or is
that too wide an assessment?

Shiraz Maher:	Certainly based on historical

precedent—I would resist looking into a crystal ball—
I think one could make the case that certainly these
people will be active in one form or another. At least
if they are not immediately going to come back and
pose a direct and immediate threat to the United
Kingdom, they will nonetheless, I think to some
extent, be building networks, will become charismatic
leaders and figureheads in their own right, and of
course have the kudos or cachet of having participated
in this conflict, so for another generation of young
men they will be seen as role models in one light
or another.

Michael Ellis: Thank you. You published two
influential studies, which I notice have been on
counter-terrorism strategy, that have been applauded
by others, including Lord Guthrie, the former Chief
of the Defence Staff, who called it “remarkable” and
Michael Gove, the Secretary of State for Education,
called it “brilliant” so we are very grateful to you for
coming in today and giving us your assessment.

Q496 Mr Winnick: How long do you feel that there
will be this continued jihad offensive? Is it a matter

of the next 10, 20, 30 years? It has happened
previously. How do you assess the situation?

Michael Ellis: Briefly, please.

Shiraz Maher: I can only be pessimistic about the
situation in Syria right now. I regard it as very grave.
The only point I would make is that in the last sort of
week or so, there has been a lot of infighting among
the various rebel groups, particularly in the northern
parts of the country, and part of that has been a turn
by local Syrians against foreign fighters, the so-called
muhajireen. There has been a lot of chatter among a
lot of them as to what their future might be in Syria,
but I would say they are a very dedicated group and
they are not easily dissuaded from the veracity of what
they are doing, so I think they are going to remain out
there for some time.

Q497 Mr Winnick: Communism in Europe to a
large extent ended with the ending of the Soviet
regime, which lasted in itself some 74 years;
communism obviously continues, but basically it is no
longer a threat in Europe. Would you say this would
be the same span of years for the jihad offensive, a
desire to bring about a world Muslim state and so on
and so forth?

Shiraz Maher: To give a very quick answer, what I
would say is I believe the threat was in great decline
with the death of Osama bin Laden and then Anwar
al-Awlaki. I believe the crisis in Syria, as it has
evolved, has probably extended the jihadist threat to
the region, the Middle East, and indeed more broadly
to the West probably by two generations.

Q498 Michael Ellis: So you are quite pessimistic?
Shiraz Maher: Yes.

Mr Winnick: Most people are.

Michael Ellis: Sadly, on this subject there is scope
for a great deal of pessimism.

Thank you very much for contributing to this
Committee’s report on counter-terrorism. Thank you
very much for coming in, Mr Maher.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 71

Tuesday 28 January 2014

Members present:
Keith Vaz (Chair)

Ian Austin
Mr James Clappison
Michael Ellis
Paul Flynn
Lorraine Fullbrook

Dr Julian Huppert
Yasmin Qureshi
Mark Reckless
Mr David Winnick

Examination of Witness

Witness: Gilles de Kerchove, EU Counter-Terrorism Co-ordinator, Council of the European Union, gave
evidence.

Q499 Chair: Bonjour. Order. Un moment, s’il vous
plait. Could I call the Committee to order and I refer
everyone present to the Register of Members’
Interests, where the interests of Members of this
Committee are noted? This is the Committee’s
continuing investigation—the inquiry into counter-
terrorism—and we are delighted to have speaking to
us from Brussels Gilles de Kerchove, the EU Counter-
Terrorism Co-ordinator. Good afternoon, Mr
Kerchove, and thank you very much for giving
evidence to the Committee.

Gilles de Kerchove: Good afternoon, my pleasure.
Chair: Members of the Committee—you cannot see
some of them at the moment, but you will when they
ask their questions—have a number of questions to
put to you about the situation regarding counter-
terrorism. I do not know whether you have been
following the deliberations of this Committee over the
last four months, but we have come to you because
we are very interested first of all in your role as the
EU Counter-Terrorism Co-ordinator. How long has
this role been in existence?

Gilles de Kerchove: The function was created after
the Madrid bombings in 2004. I have a Dutch
colleague, Gijs de Vries, who did the job for three
years, and I was appointed by the former High
Representative of Foreign Policy, Javier Solana, in
September 2007, so I have been in the job for six
years now.

Q500 Chair: How big is your support staff and your
secretariat to support the very important work?

Gilles de Kerchove: It is very light. Since this week I
have four advisers and two secretaries.

Q501 Chair: Now, what we are interested in, of
course, is first of all the architecture of counter-
terrorism. We know about the structures that exist in
the United Kingdom. How do our structures fit into
what you do? How do you relate to our Government?
Through the Council of Ministers, presumably.

Gilles de Kerchove: The EU architecture, you mean?
Chair: Yes.

Gilles de Kerchove: Yes, I should start—and it is not
rhetoric—by reminding you of the legal framework.
As you know, after the entry into force of the Lisbon
Treaty, internal security is now a shared competence
between the member states and the European Union,
but I used to say that even if it is a shared competence,

the actual division of what I would call labour, or
power, if you want, remains nevertheless 90%
member states and 10% European Union.

In the field of counter-terrorism, it is even more for
member states. They are really in the driving seat,
because part of the fight against terrorism is done by
the intelligence services. As you probably know, in
the Treaty of the European Union, Article 4, member
states who negotiated the Lisbon Treaty added one
sentence to a sentence which already said that the
member states are primarily responsible for internal
security, the following sentence was added: “Members
states are solely responsible for national security”.
Chair: That is very helpful.

Gilles de Kerchove: Therefore, I would say that the
European Union sees its work as purely
complimentary to member states’ prime responsibility
in the fight against terrorism. So what we try to do—
and what I myself try to do—is to determine where
we can add value and support member states’ efforts
against terrorism.

Q502 Chair: Of course. Would you have met the
head of our security services, the head of MI5, MI6
and GCHQ? Have you met these people?

Gilles de Kerchove: I have never met the head of
GCHQ, nor the head of MI6, like the head of the
French DGSE or the head of the German BND, but I
have met Jonathan Evans in the past and the current
head of MI5. It took three years to be invited, but
since then I have been invited to the six-monthly
meeting of what is called the CTG—the counter-
terrorism group—which is the meeting of the heads
of service, internal security service, MI5-type, every
six months.

Q503 Chair: They meet with whom? Each other or
somebody in the EU?

Gilles de Kerchove: Yes, the 28 heads of service, plus
Norway and Switzerland, I think. The heads of service
meet every six months at their level and they have
other meetings I am not aware of. I am invited twice
a year, to the six-monthly meeting, at the level of the
heads of service.

Q504 Chair: How do you relate to the Lyons Group?
Gilles de Kerchove: The G8, you mean?

Ev 72 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

28 January 2014 Gilles de Kerchove

Chair: Yes, the G8. As you know, the G8 set up their
own counter-terrorism organisation or support. Do
you relate to them at all?

Gilles de Kerchove: It is much less operational. The
Lyons Group was created many years ago in the
context of the G8. It is more policy oriented: it is more
the executive of the actual intelligence service who
attends these meetings, but I have been invited once
or twice to these meetings.

Q505 Chair: Thank you for that; that is very helpful.
Let me start by asking you about one issue that is
really causing us concern, which is the number of
British citizens and EU citizens who are travelling to
countries like Syria and involving themselves in
terrorist activities. Do you have any figures to give the
Committee about the number of EU citizens who have
gone to Syria in order to help them there?

Gilles de Kerchove: It is difficult to have accurate
figures for either EU citizens or EU residents who
have been to Syria, are currently in Syria or are back
from Syria. I know, for instance, the 700 French
mentioned by the French President. When I discussed
the issue with the Home Secretary in the UK, Theresa
May, she mentioned low hundreds. You will
understand what “low hundreds” mean—I suppose
200, 300 for the UK. I know for Belgium that we are
above 200, so when you aggregate all these different
figures, we are probably above 2,000.

Q506 Chair: We have been given some figures for
Britain by Charles Farr—who is the head of the Home
Office dealing with these issues—of about 366 British
citizens and the countries that we have been told by
the International Centre for the Study of Radicalism,
a figure of France at 412, Germany 240, Belgium 296
and the Netherlands 152. Are those the countries in
the EU—France, Britain, Germany, Belgium and the
Netherlands—where their citizens travel to Syria?
Those are the top countries, are they?

Gilles de Kerchove: Yes, you are right, these are the
top countries. I would add Denmark and Sweden a bit.
That is mainly the core group of countries.

Q507 Chair: Do we take it that the people going over
are those from the diaspora from Syria—in other
words, people who share the same religion as the
people in Syria—or Syrian people who happen to be
settled in these countries and then want to return? Are
those the vast majority of people who are going?
Gilles de Kerchove: The vast majority, I would say,
are from the first category that you mentioned. There
are some converts and some Syrian-born, country
nationals, but the bulk are, I think, Muslim residents
or citizens in Europe.

Q508 Chair: What is the EU trying to do to stop
them going?

Gilles de Kerchove: We have tried to raise the issue
very early. I myself raised the issue a year ago in
February. I was alerted by the high number of young
Belgians going to Syria, and I came to the Justice and
Home Affairs Council with a package of 22 measures
in June last year. There were five main objectives. The
first one was to try to understand the phenomenon

better by sharing as much information as possible.
Who are these people? Why are they going there? Are
there networks involved? Is there money coming from
somewhere? What are the travel patterns? That is for
those that are going there.

Q509 Chair: How many of those measures were
adopted? How many of those measures were adopted
by the Council? When you took those 22 measures,
how many were adopted?

Gilles de Kerchove: The package of 22 was
adopted—I am more than happy to share this
document with your Committee—

Chair: Please.

Gilles de Kerchove—and then I was asked in
December to report and take stock of the
implementation, but we are currently working on
them. I will explain the four other main set of
measures.

The second one is on prevent. How can we design a
mechanism to stem the flow? This is, of course, a huge
challenge. The third one is to reflect on whether we
have an adequate legal framework to investigate and
prosecute those who have joined the most radical
groups.

The fourth set of measures is how can we maximise
the existing mechanisms, like the Schengen
Information System, or adopt new mechanisms, like
passenger name records, to detect suspicious travel of
unknown travellers, and finally, how can we engage
collectively more with transit countries and mainly
with Turkey?

So these are the set of five objectives, where we have
several ideas, but we are currently in the process of
trying to design a concrete project. Let me take one
or two.

Chair: We will come to some of those projects in a
second; I just want to bring other colleagues in. Thank
you very much for that; we would be very grateful if
you could send us the list of those 22 measures.

Q510 Mr Winnick: Do you think that those who are
going to Syria to fight are doing so in the main
because they believe that there is a blatant injustice
arising from the violence and terrorism of the Assad
regime, or do you think it is more a question of
religious support—Sunnis against the religion of the
Government in Syria?

Gilles de Kerchove: It is a very good question. I think
they are both reasons. I think that was why many
member states at the outset thought that the reason
why people were going to Syria was because they
were idealist people who wanted to help fellow
Muslims pushing for democracy. What we see now
more and more is the ideological dimension as a main
driver for this process.

I would say the internet plays a very important role
and satellite TV. The call, in many places in the
Muslim world, for violent jihad, the al-Qaeda
rhetoric—I would not say they are religiously driven;
it is more driven by the al-Qaeda ideology.

Q511 Mr Winnick: It is more, as you say, religion
than, say, the way in which over 70 years ago so many

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 73

28 January 2014 Gilles de Kerchove

young men went to Spain to fight the fascists. Do you
not draw a comparison there?

Gilles de Kerchove: Yes, indeed. Initially, I think
some of them may have been—and still are—attracted
by that feeling that it is their duty, like in the late
1930s, when people were going to join the
international brigades against the fascists in Spain. I
think it is more and more the ideology that plays a
role.

Q512 Mr Winnick: What worries us in Britain, and
no doubt in other European countries, about those who
go to Syria to fight is that some of them may be so
indoctrinated by terrorist elements—obvious terrorist
elements, which we all know about—that they come
back to our countries, Britain in this case, and inflict
or try to inflict terrorist attacks on our people. Do you
think there is any such danger?

Gilles de Kerchove: I fully share that concern. I think
you have three elements. Those who are joining the
fight will learn how to use a bomb, how to use a
Kalashnikov or how to build a bomb. They will most
likely be indoctrinated even more and so get more
radical; and, not insignificantly, they will have friends
from all over the world. It is a huge magnet for would-
be jihadists coming from all over the world, so they
will be connected to friends in Libya, Indonesia and
everywhere from the Muslim world. Therefore, I think
it is likely that among those returning to Europe, some
will get back with bad feelings, so may even be
directed by groups in Syria to mount an attack in
Europe. It is a very legitimate concern. That is why
we try to be prepared, to design mechanisms to
assess—and I think this will be necessary for each and
every returnee—whether this person poses a threat,
and whether they need psychological support, because
many have been confronted with a really ugly war, or
social support to help them get back to normal life, to
find a job or to retrain for that. Some will have to be
sent to a court, because if they have joined ISIS or al-
Nusra, they are violating the law. Some will have to
be monitored discreetly, so we will have to design a
response for each and every returnee.

Mr Winnick: Our security authorities should be
somewhat on the alert in Britain, as in other countries,
for those who return, as some could be a potential
danger to our citizens.

Gilles de Kerchove: Very much so.

Mr Winnick: Thank you very much.

Q513 Paul Flynn: Last year, throughout the whole
year, 26 people were arrested in Britain for travelling
between Syria and the United Kingdom. Already this
month, 16 people have been arrested. That means by
the middle of next month there will be the same
number as travelled throughout the entire period of
last year. Is this accelerating trend happening in other
countries in Europe?

Gilles de Kerchove: I must confess I do not have the
recent figures on the returnees. What I have seen
recently was, because of the fight between the Islamic
Front on the one hand and the ISIS on the other one,
the most radical group, and al-Nusra being a bit on the
part of Islamic Front in northern Syria, some foreign
fighters may be asked to get back home, because they

would be pushed aside by the less radical movement
and that would have prompted a quicker return. To be
honest, I do not have the most recent figures that show
an increasing return. It may be that your services are
detecting them better. That may be another
explanation.

Q514 Paul Flynn: Can you give a clear picture of
some kind of proportions of people that are going to
the al-Nusra group and others going to the other
groups there, the Government and the conventional
opposition?

Gilles de Kerchove: I think this is more a question for
the security services, but my understanding is that few
foreign fighters are joining al-Nusra as such, because
this group is much more demanding on those who can
join. There is a vetting procedure, which is much more
demanding, while ISIS, initially the Iraqi terrorist
group, is much more open to any form of foreigners
and they do not check their background and so on. I
think the bulk of foreign fighters are more on the side
of ISIS. How many are still with the Islamic Front or
the Free Syrian army? I must say I do not know. My
assessment is that, nevertheless, most of the foreign
fighters are more on the side of the extremist group.

Q515 Paul Flynn: On the 16th of this month, two
women were arrested carrying a large sum of money
to Syria. Is this, again, another trend that is obvious
throughout Europe—of women being used as couriers
for large sums of money?

Gilles de Kerchove: I had not heard many cases of
that sort, but that is probably the first time we have
seen that women are going to Syria. We have not seen
that trend in Somalia or Yemen or Afghanistan in the
past.

Q516 Paul Flynn: This is my final question. Have
you any theory on why this trend should be
accelerating? Clearly, Syria is very much in the news,
but the acceleration in the number of people travelling
does seem to be alarming. Why is it happening?
Gilles de Kerchove: I think that there is objective
criteria as to why we have such a high number. It is
first because it is so easy to reach Syria, unlike the
Sahel for instance. You may have even asked why we
did not have more would-be jihadists going to Mali
after the French intervention, because this was a
Western army entering into a Muslim country. As your
predecessor said, in Syria we have a fight among
Sunnis and Shi’a, both Muslim. The easy way to enter
Syria is one explanation. Another one is, if I may say
so, the environment. Many of the would-be jihadists
are urban people and the biotope is more similar in
Syria than it is in the desert at 40 degrees. That is the
second. In turn, the internet, social media, Facebook,
Twitter pay a huge role in this acceleration. We have
a sort of dynamic. A lot of these young jihadists in
a way are narcissists. They want their portrait with
Kalashnikov. They put their picture on YouTube,
Facebook, and they try to encourage colleagues,
friends to join. There is a sort of internal dynamic
here.

Paul Flynn: Merci, Monsieur, je vous en prie.

Gilles de Kerchove: Merci.

Ev 74 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

28 January 2014 Gilles de Kerchove

Q517 Lorraine Fullbrook: Good afternoon, Mr
Kerchove. I would like to pick up on the point about
the internet, social media and satellite TV. In your
opinion, how big of a role is satellite TV, internet or
social media playing in driving this ideological
movement and the recruitment of foreign fighters?
Secondly, how do we tackle that?

Gilles de Kerchove: That is a good question, if I may
say so, but a very difficult one. I think most people
agree that the internet is the critical recruitment factor,
especially as I said it is no longer the web 1.0—the
website. It is more the social media, the web 2.0—
Facebook, Twitter. They played a significant role in
indoctrination, recruitment, radicalisation, for sure. As
for satellite TV, there is some television. If I can just
mention one, al-Wesal—where you have preachers
calling for violent jihad. It is interesting to see this
last three years some of the Salafists are now
advocating for violent jihad, not only the classic jihad.
You may have seen in Cairo some months ago some
very well known imams and clerics in the Muslim
religion stated that it was a duty for the Muslims to
join the fight. This, I think, plays a role, no doubt.
That requires a response on our side at three levels.
First, we have to monitor all this, and that is for the
security services mainly. We have set up at Europol a
common platform called Check the Web, where we
have tried to pull some resource together, but it is still
very modest. So the first one is monitoring. The
second one is taking down illegal websites. That is a
very difficult issue where, in your country, you have
worked on for years. The third one, which is even
more difficult, is: how can we ourselves use the
internet to counter the narrative?

On the second one, , the EU should look into ways we
can improve the way we remove from internet illegal
websites, because as you know, it is very sensitive,
because it raises the question of the balance with
freedom of speech. How can we improve referral
mechanisms by which the users themselves let Google
know that they have found some unacceptable
websites, videos and pictures on the internet? This is
a discussion that we have started with these big
companies.

The last one—how we can counter the narrative?—is
something on which you work, the Home Office
works and RICU, inside the Home Office, works, but
I am not convinced that the Government are well
placed to do so. It is more about how we can reinforce
the communities themselves—those who want to
counter the narrative—to use more internet.
Commissioner Malmström, the Commissioner for
Home Affairs, will set up a forum to discuss with the
big players, Google, Facebook and Twitter. Anything
we can do to help them to be more professional in the
way they use the internet, I think, would help. We can
support some projects, translate some materials, but I
am not convinced that Governments themselves are
credible voices in these kinds of narrative, because
it will be seen as biased. It is more about create an
environment that is conducive to that sort of narrative.

Q518 Lorraine Fullbrook: Do you mean the
narrative has to come from within the communities
themselves?

Gilles de Kerchove: Indeed, it is much more credible.
Of course, we could try to use former jihadists. We
know that some of them have a lot to tell about their
experiences. They maybe went to Syria with idealistic
ideas and discovered quickly that it was not what they
had in mind—that it is an ugly war, a lot of blood,
that people are suffering, beheading, and so on. It
would be interesting to see the jihadist himself
explaining the terrible experience he went through.
Again, it is very difficult to set up that sort of project.
The Commission, in its recent communication on
radicalisation and recruitment, said that it would be
available with financial support to support those
efforts in the communities themselves.

Lorraine Fullbrook: Thank you very much.

Chair: Before I come to Michael Ellis, Mr Winnick
just wishes to correct one thing that he said, for the
record: that those who went over to fight in Spain, he
said, was 73 years ago, but he should have said 78 or
77 years ago. Just for the record, I am sure that does
not apply to anyone sitting in this room, but we
apologise if that has upset anyone who is watching
this event.

Q519 Michael Ellis: Mr Kerchove, thank you very
much for coming on. Moving on a little from what
you have just been asked, are you familiar with the
counter-terrorism infrastructure that has been
established by the British Government and the
mechanisms for dealing with counter-terrorism and
anti-terrorism in the United Kingdom? If so, do you
have any observations about it? Are you supportive,
generally speaking, of the mechanisms that have been
brought into operation here?

Gilles de Kerchove: It is not my role to assess the way
member states exercise their main role of providing
security for their citizens. Let me start by saying the
UK is one of the member states helping me the most
and, since the beginning of my function as EU Co-
ordinator, I have always received outstanding support
from the different Home Secretaries, from the Home
Office, the FCO. It is really very helpful. When I go,
for instance, to Pakistan and I try to develop a project
there, it is always with the great support of the High
Commissioner and all colleagues in the UK. That is
for the record; I have to insist on this; it is very
helpful.

I must say, I am very impressed by the real
professionalism of Charles Farr and his team and the
colleagues in the FCO. These are people who are
doing their best to design the right policies. We have
to acknowledge it is sometimes a difficult experience.
I have been in many panels in the UK myself where
there were discussions as to whether we should only
address radicalisation leading to violence or we should
start focusing a bit earlier on the ideology and
radicalisation as such. This is a discussion that has
taken place recently. How do we engage with the
communities? There were criticisms of the policies of
the previous Government and so on. No one has the
magic bullet.

The experience gained in the UK has had some
influence on the European Union and on other
countries. For some time the French have been
reluctant to enter into a real strategy for prevention;

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 75

28 January 2014 Gilles de Kerchove

they are currently doing this. The EU CT strategy, for
instance, is in a way replication of the four Ps of the
CONTEST strategy: prevent, protect, pursue, prepare.
Even if it is not my role to comment, I would say that
the British Government is extremely active in Europe
in helping us to design the right response.

Q520 Michael Ellis: You have referred to the fact
that you do not think there is a magic bullet to deal
with these issues. With the issue of radicalisation,
particularly of young people, juxtaposed with the
ideology issue that you have also referred to, do you
think there is any more that member states of the
European Union, particularly the United Kingdom,
can do to address these inherent problems and factors
that lead to the sorts of issues that you have been
answering questions about this afternoon?

Gilles de Kerchove: Again, I don’t want to single out
anything special in the UK. I will say collectively we
have to know that we have a consensus to invest more
on prevention. As I said, the Commission is on board.
They issued a communication last week, or two weeks
ago, which is excellent. It is the first time that the
European Commission has come with ideas and
concrete proposals. We now have to act and really
concretise these good ideas. They mentioned 10
different ideas and we support member states’ efforts.
The good news is that the Commission restated that it
was available to mobilise EU money in support of
member states’ concrete projects. The idea to have a
discussion with the big IT companies like Google and
Facebook is something that, at the level of a member
state, is nearly impossible to achieve. An EU forum
with these companies, and possibly an EU-US
discussion with these companies, will have much
more weight and impact. It is about pooling resources
together and sharing best practice that we will
achieve.

On prevent, another initiative of the Commission that
I support is the setting up of what is called the
Radicalisation Awareness Network. It is a network of
700 practitioners that is excellent at sharing the
successes and the failures. For instance, your Channel
mechanism, which tries to help radicals get out of
radical extremism, is something that is very useful to
share with other member states. Of course, if the UK
can keep the same commitments and help the
Commission keep this issue high on the agenda, even
better, but I do not have any specific weakness or
failure to mention.

Michael Ellis: Thank you, that has been very helpful.

Q521 Yasmin Qureshi: I want to explore three
different, albeit linked areas with you. Firstly, as you
may be aware from reading some of the British
newspapers some years ago, when we have had some
very high-profile terrorist cases, with people being
tried in the United Kingdom and in the USA, the
intelligence or police officers investigating these
crimes have said that most of these young men—and
it was mostly young men—have said that their motive
for getting involved in these things was not because
they want to attack the Western way of life, which is
what our media normally portrays as their reason, but
because they believe that the Western countries have

been interfering with and invading a lot of Muslim
countries over the last 20 to 30 years, such as
Afghanistan, Iraq and others, where a lot of Muslims
have died. That is their thinking or rationale for doing
this. In light of that, has any attempt ever been made
by various counter-terrorism units or the police to look
at those issues, such as what could be a motive, and
whether, despite the media narrative in our country—
that it is all about the Western way of life—it actually
seems to be about a very different reason?

Gilles de Kerchove: It is not for the police itself to
assess whether the invasion of Iraq is a legitimate
reason for violating the law. The police are there to
apply the law, to investigate the crime. It is more for
policymakers to understand the process that leads
people to violence and design the right response. What
we discussed about the counter narrative requires that
we understand the main rhetoric in the ideology better.
I would say that al-Qaeda is pretty good at exploiting
all arguments. What we have to do is develop our own
narrative and explain why it is not acceptable to use
violence. This is something I tried, but there is room
for serious improvement in the communication of the
European Union with some member states.

If I take the issue of Syria, one of the difficulties we
have is that we want Assad to be removed. By having
this goal, we suggest to the would-be jihadists that it
is a good idea that he be removed and some of them
might think that it is a green light to go to Syria and
fight. It is one of the weaknesses, I acknowledge that.
The way we communicate and the way we have to
develop this—calling it a narrative is not a good way
to put it, because in a way we know that we have to
challenge the narrative, but we have to develop our
own narrative. On this we need to improve. I
mentioned RICU in the past. Yours is probably one of
the few Ministries of the Interior—if not the only
one—that has a dedicated unit to work on
communication, to get a sense of who the audience is,
the way we have to address the audience and what the
message is that we have to convey. I hope we can
improve on this in the coming months, because this is
indeed a very important challenge.

Q522 Yasmin Qureshi: Coming on from there—I
was going to ask about Syria in my second question—
would it be fair to say that Syria’s situation is perhaps
different from the other conflicts and the other people
who have been charged with terrorist offences,
because their motivation seems to be very different?
The suggestion is that a lot of people going to Syria
are going for humanitarian purposes—that is, to help
and assist people who are injured. Most of those, of
course, going to Syria are hopefully not going to be
any danger to anyone. Would you accept the fact that
a lot of people going to Syria are not going there to
fight, but are going for humanitarian purposes,
because that is what some of the people tell me? They
say they are getting very upset that when they travel
to Syria, wanting to go to Syria, everyone assumes
that they are going to become terrorists or jihadists or
that they are going for a battle. From your knowledge,
is there any truth in that? Are they right or wrong?
Gilles de Kerchove: I am afraid I do not have precise
figures. I cannot split between those who are going

Ev 76 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

28 January 2014 Gilles de Kerchove

there for humanitarian reasons and those who are
among the fighters, or those who are fighting
alongside the Free Syrian Army and those who are
joining the more extremist groups. The information I
get from most of the member states concerned in the
security services are that the bulk are still joining the
extremist groups. There are, of course, people who
are going there for humanitarian reasons. One of the
projects we should design—I think this is something
they tried in the UK, as well—is to offer an alternative
project to redirect the energy of those who want to be
helpful and help Syria to do that through an
humanitarian process, instead of fighting and using a
Kalashnikov.

Q523 Chair: Sorry to interrupt you for one second,
Monsieur Kerchove—it is difficult to have a dialogue
in this way—but could say, in response to Miss
Qureshi’s question about on humanitarian support,
whether it would help if individual EU countries took
in more Syrian refugees on a humanitarian basis?
Would this decrease the number of people wanting to
go for jihad in Syria? Just a quick answer: yes or no?
Gilles de Kerchove: Could you repeat that? I do not
completely understand. Could you could speak a bit
louder?

Chair: Following on from what Miss Qureshi said, if
the EU countries took in more Syrian refugees, would
that decrease the number of Syrians going to fight
jihad in Syria?

Gilles de Kerchove: No, I don’t think so.

Chair: You don’t think so. That is perfectly fine;
thank you.

Yasmin Qureshi: I think you said in answer to one
of my colleagues’ previous questions about the
internet and social media that there was a respected
imam or somebody who had said that it was right to
go off and fight. Not wanting to get into debate about
this—if we are making declarations, I suppose I
should declare: I am Muslim—I have to say that there
are what I call tin-pot imams, or self-proclaimed ones,
who say various types of things that are completely
against Islam. Yet the really respected scholars, from
the Imam of Mecca, or Medina, or the heads of
scholars of the Egyptian schools and Turkish—the
respected imams—all condemn this kind of behaviour
and this kind of activity. Do you think that maybe
their word, which is must more respected, should be
the one that is out there in the media, so these young
men and a few women who may be being radicalised
by what I call the tin-pot ones, hear a counter-
narrative from the proper ones, who say that this is
completely wrong?

Chair: Thank you, Miss Qureshi. Sorry, Monsieur
Kerchove, we are running out of time because we
have a slot to talk to you in Brussels. Perhaps you
could give a quick answer to Yasmin Qureshi and then
we can have two more very quick questions.

Gilles de Kerchove: The answer is: the more we can
encourage scholars to ask Muslims not to go to Syria,
the better. I can share with the Committee if you want
the declaration I mentioned earlier coming from
Cairo, where well known scholars have had an impact.
The more we can have alternatives to that goal, the
better.

Chair: Excellent. We have two quick end questions
from Paul Flynn and David Winnick.

Q524 Paul Flynn: Is the co-operation and cohesion
that we have now between the EEAS, the Commission
and the Council likely to be in danger of divisions
resulting from the revelations by Edward Snowden
that some of our allies are spying on some of our
other allies?

Gilles de Kerchove: The main impact that I see from
the revelations of Snowden is in the European
Parliament. The competent committee of European
Parliament dealing with justice and home affairs is
now a bit reluctant to adopt an instrument that is very
important for counter-terrorism, which is called the
PNR—the passenger name record. The feeling is that
we are building, step-by-step, a Big Brother society
and therefore PNR adds another layer of collecting
more data. I think what was revealed from the NSA
has direct impact on this.

I do not see a problem between the external
intelligence services and the Council. We have been
working together very closely to define the EU
response to the NSA leaks.

Q525 Mr Winnick: I agree with the reply you gave
the Chair regarding Syrian refugees, but is it your
view that EU countries should be taking in more
refugees arising from the terrible circumstances—war
and terror—in Syria?

Gilles de Kerchove: I do not know if I have the
question right, but I think taking more refugees should
be a decision on its own merit and not connected to
counter-terrorism or the prevention of terrorism. It is
a humanitarian question. It is up to the member states
to decide to what extent they are ready to do so, but
there is a lot that we are currently doing in the region,
in Jordan, in Lebanon, in Turkey. The EU had already
spent more than €2 billion in humanitarian assistance,
but I think, just on a personal basis, that the more we
can help, the better, indeed.

Q526 Chair: We are very near completion; we will
have just two or three quick answers to these quick
questions. The EU regulation 2580/2001 allows the
freezing of assets of those who are involved in
terrorism. I was very surprised to see that no accounts
of anybody were frozen by the EU in the third quarter
of 2013. Would you have some up-to-date figures as
to how many people’s bank accounts have been
frozen? If you do not have them today, could you let
us have these figures or tell us where to find them? If
we know they are going off to perform jihad in Syria,
presumably we would want to freeze their bank
accounts. Would you be able to get us those figures,
Monsieur?

Gilles de Kerchove: I will do my best, but I think the
money in respect to Syria is not a real issue because
it is very cheap to fly to Istanbul and go to the border.
I don’t think it is an issue of money.

Chair: No, but their bank accounts are still here. They
do not take their bank accounts with them for jihad,
do they? They still remain in Barclays or wherever.
Gilles de Kerchove: Indeed. I will do my best to try
to get you those figures.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 77

28 January 2014 Gilles de Kerchove

Q527 Chair: Thank you. The second issue it would
be very helpful if you could clear up for us and write
to us about is that if somebody goes from the United
Kingdom to Syria to be involved in jihad then returns
to Istanbul and then goes to Paris, would we know
that they had arrived in Paris?

Gilles de Kerchove: We have to distinguish whether
we knew that he was in Syria and that information
had been shared—so, whether he is a known traveller
or an unknown traveller.

Chair: Yes, so if a British citizen travelling from
Bolton—to pick a place—flying from Manchester
airport, arriving in Istanbul, going to Syria, returning
via Istanbul to France or Germany or Belgium, who
would the British authorities need to tell that these
people had travelled? Who in the EU would know?
Gilles de Kerchove: As soon as the UK uses the
Schengen Information System, they can put in the SIS
an alert that this person is known to be in Syria. If it
is controlled at the external border of the European
Union or in Paris, the UK will be informed that the
person flagged in the SIS has been controlled in Paris
and so we learn.

Chair: Sure, but that is only if they fly. If they travel
by car from Istanbul—

Gilles de Kerchove: The same.

Chair—and they cross the border with Greece and
they go from Greece to Belgium, you think you would
be able to track them.

Gilles de Kerchove: This is an issue that was
discussed last week in Athens and that I raised myself.
There is no systematic check of EU citizens, because
they enjoy the right of free movement. I think we
should use this a bit more systematically—so, even by
car at the external border. If the person is checked
against the SIS, the UK would be informed
accordingly.

Chair: That is extremely helpful. We have been very
enlightened by this evidence session and we are
extremely grateful. We know you must be very busy.
We thank you very much for the work that you do
with the British Government in Brussels in support of
our agenda. We thank you for what you have done
joining us this afternoon. Merci beaucoup. Au revoir,
Monsieur Kerchove.

Gilles de Kerchove: It was a pleasure. Thank you
very much.

Chair: Thank you. That concludes that session. I will
suspend the session for just two minutes while we
remove the equipment and then we will welcome
Jean-Paul Laborde.

Examination of Witness

Witness: Jean-Paul Laborde, UN Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, gave evidence.

Q528 Chair: Mr Laborde, thank you very much for
bearing with this Committee. We want to start, if we
may, with a look at the issue of foreign fighters—you
sat in for the last session, so you know the tenor of
the Committee’s questions. We will be as succinct as
we can. If you could respond accordingly, that would
be very helpful.

Is there an increase in the number of people going to
Syria? We have looked at the figures: 366 from the
United Kingdom. Is it a European problem or—you
could look at this from the UN’s point of view—is it
something that is much wider? Are people from other
countries in the Middle East travelling to Syria or are
we just looking at it through the prism of Western
Europe?

Jean-Paul Laborde: Mr Chairman, first of all, it is
an honour to be with you today—all of you. I have
something to say before I begin my remarks on your
question. I would like to state for the record that I
am here as a representative of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, in my capacity as
an official of the UN. I am here to provide an
informal, unsworn oral briefing on the topic of this
counter-terrorism policy. The CTC has agreed to
voluntarily provide this briefing, and nothing related
to the provision of this information briefing shall be
considered as a waiver, express or implied, of any
privilege or immunity of the United Nations.

Chair: Do not worry, Mr Laborde; we will not arrest
you. You will be free to go.

Jean-Paul Laborde: That would be something
interesting, because as you know, I used to be a judge
in the Supreme Court.

Chair: We are on tenterhooks in case a peacekeeping
force from the UN arrives to take over the Home
Affairs Select Committee. You are safe with us.
Jean-Paul Laborde: This is not the point.

Chair: Yes, I understand. Perhaps you could just
answer the question that I put to you.

Jean-Paul Laborde: The foreign fighters problem has
increased to 11,000.

Chair: There are 11,000 foreign fighters in Syria?
Jean-Paul Laborde: Yes.

Q529 Chair: Which is the biggest country that
provides these foreign fighters?

Jean-Paul Laborde: We do not really have full
figures, but it is coming from, let us say, everywhere.
The point was also made, by the way, by one of the
honourable members of this committee—I also saw
this in The Times last week—about going from 26 last
year to, by this time in January, already 60 foreign
fighters.

Chair: Yes, we know ours is about 366. We are
interested in the facts and figures. Which is the
country or area of the world that is providing most?
Jean-Paul Laborde: I do not know the other countries
in the West. I know very well that in France that we
have 200.

Q530 Chair: All right. You mentioned the figure of
11,000. Where do we base this figure on? Who has
given us this figure?

Jean-Paul Laborde: This is something that has been
raised by many intelligence services in the world—
that is the point—but they did not give the breakdown.

Ev 78 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

28 January 2014 Jean-Paul Laborde

Q531 Chair: All right; so it is about 11,000, but we
cannot give a breakdown, we do not know where.
Now, obviously your organisation is the United
Nations—we all know it well; I have been to visit it,
as I am sure others have. You are part of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, so how
big is your directorate and how do you fit into the
architecture?

Jean-Paul Laborde:	The Counter-Terrorism

Committee was created after 9/11. It was chaired by
Sir Jeremy Greenstock. Then in 2005 the directorate
was established. We have 50 people who are experts.
They are not part of the bureaucracy per se; they are
prosecutors, intelligence officers, law enforcement
and so on. What we do is we are the only body in the
UN—and probably, in many instances, the world—
with the mandate of assessing the counter-terrorism
capacities of member states.

Q532 Chair: Going back to your figure of 11,000,
which is of great interest to this Committee, bearing
in mind that we think it is about 366 Britons, if I add
up all the Western Europeans, it comes to about 1,000;
therefore, 10,000 come from elsewhere. In the role
that you have played over the last few years, is Syria
now the theatre for jihad worldwide, whereas it used
to be Somalia and perhaps to some extent Yemen? Is
the focus now on Syria? Is that right or are there other
areas where there are foreign fighters going in?
Jean-Paul Laborde: No, I do not think so. First off,
Syria did not start with terrorism; Syria started with an
insurgency. That was not, at the beginning, a terrorism
place, let us say; it was a fight against the
Government.

Chair: Yes, we know the history of Syria; I am just
asking you a different question. I am asking you: is
this now the centre?

Jean-Paul Laborde: No.

Chair: Which other countries would you identify as
countries of interest to the United Nations?
Jean-Paul Laborde: Yemen.

Chair: All right; so foreign fighters are going to
Yemen?

Jean-Paul Laborde: Yes.

Chair: Do we have a figure, as we do for Syria?
Jean-Paul Laborde: No, I have no figures for Yemen
at the moment.

Chair: The international agencies have not made an
assessment of Yemen?

Jean-Paul Laborde: No, you see the international
agencies, as you say, are providing support to counter-
terrorism. They are not an intelligence agency per se.

Q533 Chair: No, I understand. You very helpfully
gave us facts, which the Parliament always likes.
Facts: you said 11,000; so Yemen is a country of
interest. Where else is a country of interest where
foreign fighters from the UK and other countries
might go and fight?

Jean-Paul Laborde: You have still, of course,
Western Africa. You probably also have Pakistan.
They are the main countries in which we have
foreign fighters.

Q534 Chair: Is Syria the top of the league? If we
had a champions league table of foreign fighters, is
Syria at the top or another country?

Jean-Paul Laborde: I do not know.

Chair: All right.

Jean-Paul Laborde: The figures that I have got—the
11,000—I feel that we do not have the same type of
figures as elsewhere.

Q535 Chair: Would you be able to help this
Committee with the issue of freezing of assets by
various Governments? Who would collect figures on
the freezing of assets of those involved in terrorism?
Would it be the UN?

Jean-Paul Laborde: No. This is an IMF problem.
Chair: Would the IMF would be able to provide this
Committee with figures as to assets that have been
frozen?

Jean-Paul Laborde: Yes, I think so.

Chair: Because the UN does not have them, or is it
not part of your remit?

Jean-Paul Laborde: No, what we do, for example—
I do not want to extend into very precise questions;
what I want to say is that we are helping countries in
asset freezing, that is for sure.

Q536 Chair: I just pose this question. Please do not
take it personally, but there are 50 of you in the UN
in this particular directorate. What exactly do you all
do all day?

Jean-Paul Laborde: As I said, we assess the situation
in all the countries of the world, in terms of counter-
terrorism measures—that they are sufficient. Then—
this is a new phase now—we are also providing
support to countries in following up the reports. In
terms of efficiency, I follow fully your point—“Well,
what are these persons doing in the UN?” First,
assessment, and then—now, because I felt it was not
enough—following up on these assessments.

Q537 Chair: How would you follow up? I will give
you example: two brothers, Akram and Mohamed
Sehab, have been killed. British citizens were killed
in Syria fighting for al-Qaeda last week—two British
citizens. How would we be able to help the British
Government before they went, when they were there
or, indeed ,if they had not been killed, if they came
back? What is the UN’s role in all this?

Jean-Paul Laborde: The UN role is, on the basis of
countering violent extremism, to help the countries in
the de-radicalisation. That is what we do.

Chair: All right.

Jean-Paul Laborde: Not all the programmes that
Gilles de Kerchove has mentioned. This is what we
have to do; this is one of the roles of this body.

Q538 Chair: As far as the United Kingdom is
concerned then what is the first cardinal principle of
de-radicalisation that you might tell a Minister of the
British Government that we can pursue?

Jean-Paul Laborde: There are three issues. The first
one in my view is education. We have done a lot of
things on the military and intelligence measures, but I
feel that now we are ready to insist on all the
programmes related to education and also, of course,

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 79

28 January 2014 Jean-Paul Laborde

the counter- narrative. Concerning the counter-
narrative, I appreciate the last question of the last
session. I would like to say that to be helped by the
clerics who are moderate is one of the ways through
which you can help these young people in correcting
what they do in terms of extremism.

Chair: Excellent.

Q539 Michael Ellis: Thank you for coming in, Mr
Laborde. There have been accusations against the
British security service regarding alleged renditions
and also pertaining to the Snowden revelations. Can
you make an assessment from your own expertise as
to whether these revelations have had any impact or
would have been likely to have any impact on the
UK’s ability to assist at risk countries? For example,
in building the rule of law and a human-rights
compliant response to terrorist activity. In other
words, do you think the Snowden leaks have been
harmful to the national interests of member states of
the European Union, including the United Kingdom?
Jean-Paul Laborde: I think that we are in an
evolution process. We have to strike the balance
between security and human rights. We have to know
what we are fighting for. We are fighting for certain
principles—universal principles, the universal charter
and all of that. We have to strike this balance. The
second point is that we have to be firm in the
repudiation of terrorism. I think that we have to say,
“No, we don’t accept that because it is the first
violation of human rights.” So the second thing is to
strike the balance. Thirdly, perhaps we can find
solutions to find the right way between what we need
in terms of security and what we need in terms of
protecting human rights. I do not think that the
Snowden problem will change that too much. Perhaps
what President Obama has done—this panel of
experts—will help on this issue. The panel of experts
will look into this matter. I am not sure that the
Snowden issue will change this approach. It is a signal
for us to strike the balance; I want to come back to
this point.

Q540 Michael Ellis: I think we all appreciate that
there is a need—and a difficult need—to have a
balance between security and the right to know, if I
can put it as simply as that. In this particular instance,
are you prepared to go further and come down on one
side or another, as far as what you think has happened
in that particular case? Do you think there has been
damage to national security interests or can you not
say?

Jean-Paul Laborde: Well, I am not the one to

evaluate the security interests of the UK. I am not in
that position. You are a very old democracy; you
know what to do in order to have this kind of balance.
Michael Ellis: Thank you very much; I will not press
you further.

Q541 Mr Winnick: Is there any evidence whatsoever
from the work that you undertake with your
colleagues that terrorists have been assisted by the
Snowden revelations?

Jean-Paul Laborde: No. There is no evidence of that.
Mr Winnick: There is no evidence of such a kind?

Jean-Paul Laborde: No, I do not think so—as far as
I know, at least.

Q542 Mr Winnick: Well, you should know in your
very senior position. Were you at all surprised by
some of the revelations that the German Chancellor’s
mobile phone was—what is the term?—bugged and
other intrusions? Were you at all surprised by this?
Jean-Paul Laborde: Yes, I was surprised. The point I
would like to make—and to come back to something
on this question—is this. In 2001, it appears that a lot
of the information was already in the hands of the US
Government concerning the attack, before the attack
occurred. What I want to say is that to have too much
information, from time to time, with all the
information that the international intelligence agencies
have they can be submerged by the information and
then there is a problem of selecting the information
that you have in hand. So, to listen to every person in
the world, perhaps it is not something that could lead
to good counter-terrorism work. You know what I
mean? Of course we are surprised to have these types
of things, but in the end I feel that in counter-terrorism
policy, probably at a certain point we might wish to
be more selective on what we do.

Q543 Mr Winnick: Do you think that if President
Obama’s suggested reforms and changes take place—
there may be a question mark about—more or less
along the lines that he set out very recently and if
intelligence gathering is much more restricted than it
has been, particularly the National Security Agency
and the rest, and the relationship with GCHQ here,
that would give more credibility to the intelligence
agencies?

Jean-Paul Laborde: Let us see what the opinions are
of the panel. I am not in the National Security Agency.
The gathering of intelligence—I did not say it should
be restricted; it should be more selective. Perhaps
there are some restrictions that have to be absorbed,
taken in place.

Q544 Paul Flynn: The head of Scotland Yard’s
counter-terrorism command has said of those who go
to Syria from Britain that they either get killed or they
get radicalised. Would you agree with this? Are
countries justified in taking measures to restrict the
freedom of those who return and treat them as
potential terrorists?

Jean-Paul Laborde: Well, it is a very serious issue.
When they go there and when they come back, we
never know what they will do, so we have to speak
with them, we have to look at what they have done,
and we have to probably re-educate them and, of
course, monitor all of them. That is a really serious
issue. The point is that when they go there, even if
they are not radicalised, they go into the training and
this training is a training of fighters. When they come
back, let us see what they have, because probably at
the very beginning they are not going there with this
intention, but when they are there and they come back,
they are absolutely dangerous, or can be dangerous.

Q545 Paul Flynn: Do your responsibilities and the
responsibilities of the United Nations include the job

Ev 80 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

28 January 2014 Jean-Paul Laborde

of trying to build confidence and counteract this gulf
of suspicion between the Western Christian world and
the Eastern Muslim world, which is probably fuelled
by the imbalance and the asymmetry of the weapons
that they each have? Do you think that the use of
drones—hugely sophisticated weapons that cannot be
matched by the other side—is itself a cause of
increasing terrorism, because terrorists, and those in
that position, potential terrorists, feel themselves
impotent to defend themselves and their communities
against drones and other sophisticated equipment?
Jean-Paul Laborde: I think that the use of military
means, whatever the means are, is not at all sufficient
for reducing the threat of terrorism—the use of
drones, the use of whatever type of means. We should
know, if it were the case, that the reduction would
have happened up to now, because the military and
intelligence means have been used up to now, and we
still have the problem of terrorism in front of us. I feel
that we have a comprehensive policy—this is where
the role of UN is important—of prevention of
terrorism, de-radicalisation. Of course, there is also
the natural means, like law enforcement and
prosecution, which gives people the right to express
themselves.

Q546 Paul Flynn: This is my final question. We have
heard alarming stories about the increase in the
number of volunteers—potential terrorists—going to
Syria. Should we be very worried about it if that
acceleration is going on, and what can we do to
increase the confidence of young Muslims to convince
them to be de-radicalised and that there is not this gulf
between the two communities of west and east?
Jean-Paul Laborde: It seems that there are two issues
there. There is, first, the issue of western and eastern
countries. In answer to this question, the UN is a place
in which we can at least have a dialogue among these
countries. That is probably what we can do. Also, I
can see in my committee that the dialogue is really
good, on good practices—for example, what the UN
has done in the past in terms of the work with the
charities and all that. That is a good dialogue there.
As I said, the second point is still the operation of
prevention in our countries. We are also about to help
them in prevention in their countries, with their own
means. I feel that it is also something that we have to
take into consideration. For example, the programmes
of de-radicalisation are extremely huge in Pakistan.
The Muslim countries have made a lot of effort in
order to de-radicalise their people. I was in Islamabad
in October, and the Government is ready to do this
job very seriously and is doing it. We are even
learning from them on this issue of what to do with
the young people. I don’t say that we can succeed, but
at least we have to try and then they can give some
lessons to us on that.

Q547 Yasmin Qureshi: I have a couple of questions.
In the organisation that you work, and as the Chair
asked earlier about what work do you do, can you
give us an example of a specific programme that your
organisation has carried out in different countries that
would try to deal with the issue of terrorism as you
see it?

Jean-Paul Laborde: I will just give you an example.
In South Asia we have a programme of co-operation
among all the countries of SAARC, which means,
India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan, Maldives and
Bangladesh. We put all these countries together at the
professional level, not at the policy level. We put
together, for example, the prosecutors, judges, law
enforcement agencies, intelligence agencies, and then
they meet on a regular basis. They meet and they start
to discuss their own issues—for example, the
difficulty they have to give evidence in court, the issue
of intelligence information transformed into evidence
in a court, and so on. There are many programmes
like that in the world. My intention is to have also a
network of judges of supreme courts to see how they
interpret the definition of terrorism in their own
countries, and to see how they can match these
definitions.

Yasmin Qureshi: Effectively you are talking about
how to strengthen the law enforcement and the
prosecutorial system of trying to get convictions.
Jean-Paul Laborde: Yes.

Yasmin Qureshi: What I was asking about is whether
there is any sort of project on a non-legal basis.
Jean-Paul Laborde: As I said, we assess and we
follow up. It means that we are using—and this is the
benefit of this body—the capacities of many agencies
of the UN, and not only of the UN, but also, for
example in Nepal and so on, for these programmes
we are using UNDP and UNESCO. UNESCO is very
involved in these type of issues related to education.
There is no need to duplicate the programmes that are
already in place by UNESCO, but of course when we
detect there is a need for that, then we ask UNESCO
to increase the efforts in this area.

Q548 Yasmin Qureshi: I have a final set of
questions, on the link between terrorism and drug
smuggling. There is information out there—or
certainly information given to us—that in parts of
Northern and Western Africa there seems to be a
degree of crossover between drug smuggling and
terrorism. Also, we sometimes read and hear that in
some countries—in Pakistan, for example, in the
north-west frontier, and they have those tribal areas,
or the FATA as they are called—the Pakistani Taliban,
or the al-Qaeda Taliban or the Afghani Taliban, or
various other terrorist groups are operating. Yet quite
a lot of people say—senior people in Pakistan—that
not all of those people operating are actually jihadists
or al-Qaeda, but criminal gangs who are carrying out
a lot of these types of things to frighten people, so
that they can carry on doing all their criminal dealings
of the drugs and arms trade. Then there is this
suggestion in North and Western Africa that this is
happening. What sort of things is the UN doing, if
anything, to try to deal with these types of problems?
Jean-Paul Laborde: In terms of a link, obviously
there are what I call “objective links” between the
drugs and terrorism. It means, for example, that in
Afghanistan in the same region in which you have a
growth of the opium cultivation, you will get also the
same growth of insurgency. I have some facts for you.
In 2013, for example, 89% of the total opium
cultivation in Afghanistan took place in the southern

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 81

28 January 2014 Jean-Paul Laborde

and western region. Then in this region you have the
most important insurgency. That is what I can see. It
does not mean that terrorist organisations are the same
as the organised criminal groups dealing with drugs,
but they combine their efforts. The same in Western
Africa. Who could say, even 20 years ago when I
started to work in this region, that terrorism and
organised crime would happen? It starts with this
route of drugs, going up from the Gulf of Guinea up
to Europe. Of course, in between they match with
terrorist organisations. For example, in Cameroon
now, we had this kidnapping for ransom. The first
group who started to kidnap for ransom was an
organised criminal group and they sold the person that
they kidnapped to Boko Haram. You can see there is
an objective alliance, I would like to say, between
them. What we do at the UN—first of all, we do the
mapping. We have no pretention and we should not
have any to replace member states that have the big
means in terms of military and intelligence and law
enforcement. We just alert, support the countries, and
try to help them to prevent it.

Q549 Lorraine Fullbrook: Mr Laborde, I would like
to ask you about the monitoring and assessment of
counter-terrorism capabilities. Specifically, the last
global survey produced by the UN’s Counter-
Terrorism Committee was published in 2011. Much of
the information gathering and the assessment of that
work was actually done prior to the Arab Spring.
What impact has the Arab Spring had on the
implementation of UN resolutions intended for
counter-terrorism?

Jean-Paul Laborde: The impact is that of course we
have to start again from basic needs from member
states concerning, for example, the states—I was
thinking of Libya—that need to be supported. That is
the first one. It means support has to be given to the
countries that are in need, and there is a need there.
The assessment also is that, coming from Libya also,
you had a lot of freedom of movement for terrorists
going here and there from the beginning of the Arab
Spring—from east to west and west to east of Africa.
So the flow between, for example, the Central Africa
and Western Africa is huge now. There is no control
any more.

Lorraine Fullbrook: But how has that affected the
UN’s implementations of the counter-terrorism
capabilities?

Jean-Paul Laborde: We have to work more on these
regions, that is for sure. This is a new area for us.
Western Africa—we have always worked on that, but
the point is that the increase of the demand is just
immense, and it is not affecting too much our body
because we are, as I say, assessing it and trying to put
the other agencies together. For example, if I speak
about UNDP or UNESCO, they are very much
affected by that, because it is a lot of work to do in
addition to what they have to do, for sure.

Q550 Lorraine Fullbrook: Just one point following
Yasmin Qureshi’s question, the Committee visited
Colombia on our drugs investigation, and one of the
issues that came out of both Colombia and the United
States was the drugs movement for narco-terrorism

coming out of mainly Venezuela into West Africa,
then into Portugal and then throughout the European
Union. Do you see that increasing more as there is a
lobby for the de-criminalisation of drugs?

Jean-Paul Laborde: I don’t see the relation there. Do
you see a relation between the two?

Lorraine Fullbrook: Yes.

Jean-Paul Laborde: A call for decriminalisation, if
you call it that. The trafficking of drugs have never
been the subject matter. It was the conception of drugs
that was the issue, I think.

Lorraine Fullbrook: I just wondered if Portugal
having decriminalised class A drugs and the
movement from West Africa to Portugal specifically,
and then on to other EU countries, had been affected
by any of the lobbies? For example, in the United
States we have states now decriminalising marijuana
for example.

Jean-Paul Laborde: The use or the conception?
Lorraine Fullbrook: The use of, yes.

Jean-Paul Laborde: Not the trafficking; that is the
issue. The trafficking of drugs—for example, if you
go back to Afghanistan—is a billion dollars. There is
a lot of capacity of these criminal organisations in
doing more on that. It is not only cultivation and
consumption; the point is the trafficking. The
trafficking—I don’t see there is a diminution of the
will of member states to do that.

Q551 Chair: There is just a final question from me.
In the evidence that we have taken so far from many
different agencies and organisations, we have now
come across a plethora of organisations, with
numerous organisations and officials working all over
the world on counter-terrorism. There is yourself in
the UN, we have heard today from the EU, we know
that Europol has a function to deal with these issues.
We know that Interpol was involved in the storming
of the factories in Algeria. We know the Lyons Group
is in existence. Is it not time for one organisation
dealing with counter-terrorism to try and come to
terms with this very difficult subject? After all, the
terrorists do not have five or six different bureaucratic
organisations; they decide to blow something up and
they set about blowing it up. We seem to have a lot
of people producing a lot of papers and a lot of
analysis, but no one co-ordinating body. Is it time for
such a body, now that this is going to be with us for
ever?

Jean-Paul Laborde: That is the best question that has
probably been posed, if I may say so. The answer is
what? Do you think that at the national level—since I
was a judge in my country—we do not have this
problem of co-ordination? I feel that probably my
body is in the position of having this type of—I do
not say co-ordination, but at least to put people
together. That is the issue.

Chair: Somehow, they have to sit in the room,
because after all you are the United Nations and
therefore—

Jean-Paul Laborde: No, not only that, Mr Chairman.
Chair—you represent the good guys as well as some
of the bad guys.

Jean-Paul Laborde: That is—

Chair: You have to do them all.

Ev 82 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

28 January 2014 Jean-Paul Laborde

Jean-Paul Laborde: This is a judgment I leave to
you. What I want to say is that this body of the
Security Council has a capacity to gather the energies
of all these agencies that you just mentioned. Interpol
comes with us; Europol comes with us. Many of the—
Chair: The Lyons Group?

Jean-Paul Laborde: Whatever group; if we need to
tap on one of these organisations to assess the
situation and—this is my ambition—to have a real
follow-up, impact and, at the end, evaluation—
Chair: So basically you think it is a good idea, but
you do not know how it might be put into effect.
Jean-Paul Laborde: No, we put that in place.

Chair: You think we have it?

Jean-Paul Laborde: Yes.

Chair: With you at the Security Council?

Jean-Paul Laborde: First of all we are already doing
that. For example, when there is, say, asset freezing—
we have had questions about that—the IMF come
with me. They come.

Q552 Chair: Can you give us the figures on asset
freezing by the United Nations?

Jean-Paul Laborde: No.

Chair: Does the United Nations have figures?
Jean-Paul Laborde: This is exactly the division of
labour. IMF has a role in that. This is a business,
okay? So what I have to do, when I see there is a
point of asset freezing that is difficult and so on, then
I have to bring them with me in the assessment of
the countries. I have to do the same even with the
organisation that is in front of you—the IMO—which
works with us.

Chair: Mr Laborde, you have been extremely helpful.
If there is other information you think would be
helpful to the Committee in our deliberations—we had
not come across your role until our inquiry began; we
are delighted to have met you and very pleased to hear
your evidence—we would be very pleased to receive
it. We are very grateful, thank you.

Jean-Paul Laborde: I will follow up on the 11,000
for you.

Chair: Thank you very much. Merci.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 83

Tuesday 11 February 2014

Members present:
Keith Vaz (Chair)

Ian Austin
Mr James Clappison
Michael Ellis
Paul Flynn

Lorraine Fullbrook
Dr Julian Huppert
Mark Reckless
David Winnick

In the absence of the Chair, Mr Clappison took the Chair
Examination of Witness

Witness: Dr Thomas Hegghammer, Director of Terrorism Research at The Norwegian Defence Research
Establishment (FFI), gave evidence

Q554 Chair: I call the Committee to order and refer
all those present to the Register of Members’ interests,
where the interests of members of this Committee
are registered.

Could I welcome, coming to us from Oslo, Dr Thomas
Hegghammer, the Director of Terrorism Research at
the FFI? Thank you very much for joining us, Dr
Hegghammer. This is a further session in the
Committee’s long inquiry into counter-terrorism. We
are most grateful to you for joining us to share with
us some of your extensive experience in this matter.
Let me start with the issue of foreign fighters, which
I know is an interest of yours, and the recent report
that Abu Suleiman al-Britani—which is a nom de
guerre—became the first British citizen to blow up
explosives, the first suicide bomber, in Syria. It
concerns the prison at Aleppo where, as a result of
what he did, a number of prisoners were freed. He has
become something of a martyr among the jihadists.
We have seen this for the first time in Britain. Is this
something that is a common occurrence in Syria now,
with foreign fighters going out there to participate in
what is going on?

Dr Hegghammer: First of all, thank you very much
for having me.

Yes, foreign fighters have been present in the Syrian
theatre for a long time. They have been active in
combat operations and taking part in suicide
operations for some time. They are present in
unprecedented numbers. No other conflict in the
Muslim world in recent history has attracted the same
number that we are now seeing in Syria. The best
estimates we have speak of 2,000 Europeans in Syria,
which I believe is more than the total number of
European foreign fighters in all previous conflict
zones combined.

Q555 Chair: If we look at what happened, for
example, in Afghanistan and Iraq, you are saying that
the figure of 2,000 is a much, much larger figure than
in previous conflicts.

Dr Hegghammer: Yes, absolutely. I believe that in
no previous conflict, with the possible exception of
Afghanistan in the 1980s, have we had more than a
couple of hundred or a few hundred Europeans in a
given conflict theatre. Now we have 10 times that.

Q556 Chair: Where is Britain on the list in terms
of the numbers of jihadists who go out? In previous
evidence an estimate has been put to us of about 366
to 400. Is that an accurate figure as far as you are
concerned? Are we top of the list, or is it France or
Germany?

Dr Hegghammer: I think you are higher on the list in
terms of the absolute size of the contingents, but you
are a big country, so when you control for the size of
the population, you are probably in the middle of the
list of European countries. Some of the smaller
countries, like Belgium or Denmark, are contributing
more per thousand inhabitants than Britain does, but
the size of your contingent is substantial and is among
the largest in Europe.

Q557 Chair: You have said that one in nine foreign
fighters will return to their country of origin to carry
out a terrorist attack. That is a very large number. If
you look at the figure of 400, that means 40 could
come back and be involved in attacks on British
citizens on British soil. That is a very serious claim.
What do you base your claim on? What kind of
activities do you think these British citizens are going
to undertake once they return to the United Kingdom.
Dr Hegghammer: I should explain some of the
background for that particular estimate. It is based on
a study that I did last year, which was published in a
political science journal, in which I tried to estimate
the number of foreign fighters from the west who had
gone out to conflicts around the Muslim world in 1990
and then tried to count the number of people involved
in plots in the west who had had foreign fighter
experience. I found that on average, across conflicts
and across contingents, at most one in nine returned
to attack. I stressed in that article that it is probably a
high estimate, that the real rate is probably lower—
somewhere around one in 15 or one in 20.

Q558 Chair: But is not the key thing to stop them
going in the first place? Do you think that the British
security services and the police are doing enough?
Because if you put the figure at one in nine, of course
it is too late when they come back. Should we have a
better system of monitoring who leaves the United
Kingdom, rather than the system we have at the
moment, which is that there are no exit checks at
airports, so we do not really know they have gone?

Ev 84 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

11 February 2014 Dr Thomas Hegghammer

Dr Hegghammer: The thing about the average that I
have put forward is that it is just that: is an average.
The challenge is that the return rate—the blow-back
rate if you will—varies enormously between conflicts.
Some foreign fighter destinations have produced
almost no plots in the west, whereas others have
produced a substantial number. For example,
Afghanistan, or the AfPak region, has a relatively high
return rate. In fact, as many as three-quarters of the
foreign fighters involved in plots in Europe have their
background from AfPak, so the point is we cannot
extrapolate this ratio to Syria. The blow-back from
Syria could be much, much lower than one in nine; it
could also be even higher.

Q559 Chair: Sure, but is enough being done to stop
them going in the first place?

Dr Hegghammer: The problem is that there is only
so much that the departure country can do in this
situation. There are very powerful drivers motivating
people to go, not least the conflict itself and the
images coming out of it, and then at the receiving end
of the trajectory of the foreign fighter, you have the
porous borders—the fact that it is very easy to get
into Syria because the rebels control the inside of the
Syrian-Turkish border.1 That is an unusual situation.
In most foreign fighter destinations, the borders are
controlled, but in this case the rebels control the
border. There is only one police force left to police
the Turkish border and it is overwhelmed.

Q560 Chair: That brings me to my final point, which
is on Turkey and your statement that transit countries
such as Turkey should do their best to police their
borders and they should share intelligence on
suspected foreign fighters with the departure
countries, if we can call them that. This view that we
are experiencing what people have called ‘easyJet
terrorism’, where people can jump on a flight at Luton
and go to Istanbul very easily by the airlines there,
and then go from Turkey right to the border of Syria
and get in there very easily. Should Turkey be doing
much more in sharing information with the United
Kingdom and other countries, since Istanbul looks like
something of a hub for this kind of transit activity?
Dr Hegghammer: Yes. I do not think it is a
controversial statement to say that they should do that;
the problem is assessing whether they actually are. I
personally do not know enough about the situation on
the ground to say whether they are doing everything
they can.

There may be a role for external partners here, too, in
helping Turkey to police the border. One suggestion
would be for external partners to help Turkey build
something as simple as a fence along the border. This
is what Saudi Arabia did on its border with Iraq at
the height of the war in Iraq, around 2004 and 2005,
precisely to stop foreign fighters from entering. This is
quite a practical, simple solution that the international
community can help with.

1 Note by witness: This phrase can be understood to mean
that rebels control the Turkish side of the border, which they
obviously don’t.

Then, as I mentioned in that statement, we should do
everything we can to promote intelligence co-
operation with the Turkish authorities, so that we
know who is going in and out and as much as we can
about what they do inside.

Chair: Thank you.

(Q560a) Mr Winnick: Recognising the acute and
continuing danger of this Islamist terrorism—you
know of course of the horrors and atrocities
committed in our country, the 7/7 bombings, as well,
of course as 9/11 and many others crimes and
atrocities carried out by the terrorists—I would like to
ask you this question. Some five years ago, a relative
of mine in the closing stages of his life, in his 90s,
was entertained by the Leader of the House of Lords,
following having been given citizenship by Spain for
what he contributed in person during the Spanish Civil
War, when he put his life on the line because he
believed it was necessary, as did others who
volunteered to fight fascism before it became
fashionable to do so.

Would you see any possible similarity to my distant
relative—like so many others like him did and who
died in Spain and of course others, like George
Orwell, who survived—and what is happening now
regarding foreign fighters in Syria? Do you see any
similarity at all?

Dr Hegghammer: Yes. The phenomena are related.
This is about volunteering for someone else’s war,
based on ideas; it is just that these ideas happen to
be slightly different and that the people and networks
involved also do other things. The difference between
the Islamist foreign fighter phenomenon today and a
war like the Spanish Civil War is that today there are
many cases of people moving on from this foreign
fighter activity to international terrorism involving
attacks against civilians in western cities. You did not
have that at the time. There was not this sort of
frequent and smooth transition from guerrilla warfare
within the conflict at stake to more transnational
terrorist operations. Whatever we think about the
moral justification behind the initial involvement in
the war, I think the reality that a substantial number
of people move on to international terrorism from this
activity should merit certain policy measures to
prevent just that kind of violence.

Mr Winnick: Thank you. I have no further questions.

Q561 Ian Austin: What proportion of foreign
fighters do you think are likely to return to the west
from Syria?

Dr Hegghammer: I do not know, is the short answer.
As I said, the one-in-nine figure cannot be
extrapolated to the case of Syria because it is an
average. Specific cases can be much lower or even
higher, as we can see in the history of foreign fighter
contingents.

The problem of course is that the total number of
Europeans in Syria today is so large that even if the
ratio of return is very low, we are still talking about a
substantial absolute number of plots. I personally
think it is extremely unlikely that we will not see at
least some plots in Europe involving Syria veterans.

I think there is one crucial factor that determines
whether this becomes a low blow-back or a high

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 85

11 February 2014 Dr Thomas Hegghammer

blow-black destination, and that is the strategy
adopted by organisations on the ground in Syria.
Foreign fighter destinations produce many more plots
if there is a group in the theatre that adopts a strategy
of systematically targeting the west. That is what we
have had in Afghanistan since the mid-1990s and, to
some extent, what we have had in Yemen since 2009.
Those two destinations have by far the highest return
rate of any foreign fighter destination.

Other destinations that do not have groups with that
type of strategy produce much lower return rates.
Today in Syria there is no group that has such a
strategy, so if this situation continues, I suspect that
the blow-back rate will be relatively low, but it could
change. The war will go on for a long time and we
cannot exclude the possibility that one of the groups
or a faction within it might experiment with or adopt
a ‘west-first’ targeting strategy.

Q562 Ian Austin: In relation to the answer you gave
to my colleague, Mr Winnick, a moment ago, the big
difference between the people who went to fight in
Spain and the people who are going to fight in Syria
is that the people who went to fight in Spain were
going to defend a democratic Government and you
cannot argue that that is the case in Syria. I would
suggest that it is completely wrong to be blind to the
motivations and to suggest there is some sort of
equivalence. Should not we in the west be much more
vigorous about promoting values like democracy,
equality, freedom, fairness and tolerance to young
people who grow up in the west, in the hope that they
might have a greater attachment to those values and
the values of the west and therefore not want to go
and involve themselves in these sorts of wars abroad?
Dr Hegghammer: It is hard to disagree with that, and
I agree completely, but the question is: how exactly
do we do that, and what do we do when people resist
and reject the value in that message or programme?
Chair: Thank you.

Q563 Dr Huppert: Just to amplify the question from
my colleague, do you have any evidence to suggest
that when countries implement measures that are seen
to be discriminatory—disproportionate stops and
searches, what used to be called control orders, things
of that sort—it makes it more likely that people will
engage in conflict?

Dr Hegghammer: No, I cannot say that we have solid
evidence of that. There might be anecdotal evidence
or we might make the case for that in certain
situations, but the problem is that it is always very
difficult to disentangle the effect of particular
variables—particular factors like that—from other
things that are going on in that society at the same
time.

If you study the profiles and backgrounds of people
who become militants, you will find some people who
will report becoming motivated partly due to
harassment or that kind of thing, but you will also find
lots of people who do not—who do what they do for
other reasons—so we just do not know, is the short
answer to that.

Q564 Michael Ellis: Dr Hegghammer, I notice that
you said in answer to a question put by one of my
colleagues that you thought it would be extremely
unlikely—I think those were your words—that we
will not see some sort of plots against the UK from
these British citizens who have been fighting abroad.
Is that correct? Am I characterising what you said
correctly?

Dr Hegghammer: Yes. I think I originally said in
Europe, but I am willing to extend it to the UK,
because in fact you may already have had such a plot,
last autumn. The investigation is still ongoing, but
there is some indication that it did involve a Syria
veteran

Q565 Michael Ellis: So there are some indications
that a plot has already occurred, but can I just pinpoint
you to the UK as opposed to Europe generally? I think
you said earlier in your remarks that the UK is such a
large country, with such wide-ranging interests, that it
is particularly prone to this. Is the strategy of
systematically targeting the west one that you see as
a real and present danger to the UK?

Dr Hegghammer: I am saying that right now the
organisations fighting in Syria do not have such a
strategy. From all that I can see, they are not
systematically trying to mount operations in the west.
However, if they do so in the future, they will be able
to mount serious plots in the west. It is reasonable to
think that the UK would be quite high up on their
targeting list, given their history of targeting. I would
add that even though we do not see such a strategy at
the moment, there have been indications or signs in
the past six months that are quite worrying.

Q566 Michael Ellis: So are saying that in your view
there is a serious danger?

Dr Hegghammer: Yes2, I am saying that at the
moment we do not see any signs of a concerted effort
by the groups on the ground in Syria to target the
west, but there have been some indications in the past
six months that such a change might happen, and I am
saying “might”. Those indications include statements
and threats by foreign fighters in Syria—including
British ones—and reports conveyed by intelligence
officials, like James Clapper in the US, that dominant
groups in Syria have now established training camps
dedicated to the grooming of operatives in the west.
We lack details on the precise strategic motivation
behind it but it is certainly not—

Q567 Michael Ellis: If they were to strategically
focus on the UK, do you feel that they might find it
quite easy to launch such an attack? You have talked
about developments in the last six months, and my
final question to you is: can you put some quantifiable
measure, some percentile, on the likelihood of them
making such a move?

Dr Hegghammer: I hesitate to quantify this, because
it depends on so many variables, not least how long
the war lasts. I would say that if the war goes on for
another five years, I would expect that a group—or

2 Note by witness: I don’t recall saying yes here. I remember
thinking that I disagree with the question er’s use of the term
“serious danger”, and that I should correct it.

Ev 86 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

11 February 2014 Dr Thomas Hegghammer

one faction of a group at least—will try to adopt such
a strategy at some point.

Michael Ellis: Thank you.

Dr Hegghammer: Can I just add this? On this issue
of organised strategies compared with more scattered
self-started plots, I think it is a crucial distinction.
Right now, there is a lot of focus on the threat from
Syria and I think there is a danger of confirmation
bias—that small incidents happening in Europe are
seen as something strategic and that we over-react on
the basis of that.

Chair: Thank you.

Q568 Lorraine Fullbrook: Dr Hegghammer, there
are some suggestions that foreign fighters in Syria are
fighting a sectarian war rather than a war against the
west and are therefore less dangerous than those who
travel to Afghanistan and Iraq. Do you think this is a
valid distinction or does this cloud the debate?

Dr Hegghammer: To some extent it is, because it is
related to this point of mine that the groups in the
theatre are not actively targeting the west. The jihadi
groups in Syria are involved with a strong sectarian
dimension in the war and there is a lot more talk about
Shi’ites, and their hatred for Shi’ites, than there is talk
about the west and their hatred for the west, but we
have to bear in mind that, especially in the foreign
fighter community and among the transnational
jihadis, these opinions can change quickly. It is not
very long ago that sectarianism was not much on their
minds at all—they would focus more on the western
threat. They switched quite quickly in the context of
the Syrian war, but I feel that they could equally
switch back again, given the right circumstances.

Q569 Lorraine Fullbrook: Ultimately, you think
that the foreign fighters in Syria are as dangerous as
those who travel to Afghanistan and Iraq?

Dr Hegghammer: I would say at this point they are
probably as dangerous as the ones who went to Iraq,
but they are not as dangerous as the ones who went
to Afghanistan.

I alluded to this earlier, but there is a huge difference
between Iraq and Afghanistan. Iraq produced very few
plots in the west—the blow-back was very low—
while AfPak has had a very high blow-back rate,
because it has had an organisation, al-Qaeda central,
which has all along had as its main objective all along
to carry out attacks in the west.

Q570 Mr Clappison: Dr Hegghammer, a few
moments ago you were asked various questions
speculating on what may lead somebody to go to fight
in Syria. In your view, what it is that drives a young
man to go and fight in Syria?

Dr Hegghammer: I have not studied the profiles of
outgoing foreign fighters in detail, but my impression
is that there is a wide range of motivations. Some of
them are idealistic and to some extent laudable: it is
about helping fellow Muslims in need and providing
humanitarian assistance and other forms of support.
There are also people who leave with the more
nefarious intention of wanting to help build a very
strict, al-Qaeda style, sharia state in Syria. Then again
there is another category of motivations that are more

proximate, about the social dimension—the search for
camaraderie; the joy and excitement of adventure; the
pleasure of doing something with your life; making a
difference: all that kind of thing.

Q571 Mr Clappison: That is a common feature of
people going to conflicts. There needs to be a cause
first, though, does there not?

Dr Hegghammer: Excuse me?

Mr Clappison: That is what people do—people join
armed forces and all sorts of conflict situations with
those sorts of motivations in mind—but there has to
be a cause behind them first, does there not? Is that
right?

Dr Hegghammer: In many cases it is about a general
kind of pre-disposition to this type of activism, then a
particular opportunity comes along, in the form of a
friend suggesting a trip, or some kind of recruiter
coming into their orbit explaining that it can be done
in this particular way—that kind of thing. It is a
combination of a pre-disposition and an opportunity
in the form of some kind of social link or social
relation. My impression is that most people go with
friends and they get the idea from people in their
social networks. There are few people who are
completely self-mobilised, entirely based on internet
propaganda.

Q572 Mr Clappison: The situation among the rebel
groups in Syria has become really rather complex.
You have made the distinction between those fighting
with local insurgents and those fighting with
international terrorist groups. Could you tell us how
you would view those who are fighting with the al-
Nusra Front or the ISIS?

Dr Hegghammer: Both the al-Nusra Front and the
ISIS are very radical Islamist groups who use terrorist
tactics within the war theatre, even though they do not
do operations in the west as yet. Syria specialists—of
which I am not one—say that there is a slight
difference between the al-Nusra Front and the ISIS, in
that the ISIS is a more trans-nationally minded
organisation. The al-Nusra Front has more of a Syria-
focused agenda. It is reflected in their names. ISIS
stands for Islamic State of Iraq and Syria. They pose
themselves as an alternative state that will transcend
the Iraqi-Syrian border and reject the current
international system in that region. The al-Nusra Front
does not call itself a state because it wants to build an
Islamic state within the current borders of Syria.
Based on that, some assume that the ISIS is the more
internationally minded and perhaps the more
dangerous from a western perspective. However, the
thing is that it is the al-Nusra Front that has the
strongest links with al-Qaeda central.

Mr Clappison: I was going to ask you that.

Dr Hegghammer: You may have seen the report last
week about the al-Qaeda leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri,
disowning the ISIS saying they are no longer part of
the al-Qaeda franchise and saying that the al-Nusra
Front is their only partner in Syria. That creates a
paradoxical situation in which the al-Nusra Front is
characterised as less radical, but it is connected to a
very dangerous organisation.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 87

11 February 2014 Dr Thomas Hegghammer

I happen to think that the current situation, in which
the al-Nusra Front is in some kind of debt of gratitude
to al-Qaeda central—for having condoned it and for
having disowned its local rival—means it is not
unfeasible that the al-Nusra Front might help or
facilitate operations by al-Qaeda central using foreign
fighters in Syria, so that when a representative from
al-Qaeda central comes along and says, “Can we
please use some of your operatives or some of the
foreign-fighters for one of our projects?” it will be
difficult for them to say no. So even though the ISIS
may seem more radical, the al-Nusra Front is the
group to watch.

Q573 Mr Clappison: Very briefly, have you seen any
evidence of anti-western animus in Syria on the part
of the al-Nusra Front—attacks on civilians or
journalists or anything like that?

Dr Hegghammer: I don’t follow the in-theatre
developments in enough detail to say for certain. I
would assume that that has been the case, but it is
often difficult to attribute particular developments to
particular groups.

Chair: Thank you very much.

Q574 Mr Winnick: You have given evidence today,
doctor, obviously because of your deep understanding,
the establishment that you run and the evidence that
you have given to various organisations in different
countries. I wonder if I can put this question to you.
It is obviously very difficult to forecast; I am asking
frankly if you have any opinion. How long do you
think it is likely that Islamic terrorism is going to last?
Is it a matter of five, 10, 15 years, or as long as
European communism lasted?

Dr Hegghammer: If you had asked me that question
two or three years ago, I would have been able to
give you a more optimistic answer, but things have
happened over the past two or three years that have
made me revise that estimate substantially. The Syrian
war and other developments suggest to me that we are
going to see this phenomenon last for a long time. A
very conservative estimate would be 15 to 20 years,
and I suspect it will last longer. There is an entire new
generation of militants being socialised into violence
in Syria. There are more Jihadist groups across the
Middle East now than there was right after 9/11. There
are more people under arms. Basically this movement
does not show very many signs of weakening at this
point in time, so I think this will go on for several
decades.

Q575 Chair: Thank you. Are you also telling this
Committee that the recruitment that you mentioned is

going on in the UK through the medium of, for
example, the internet? How are they recruiting new
people? We understand those who decide on their own
to go out to Syria, but they are presumably seduced
by a particular ideology. How is this recruitment
happening?

Dr Hegghammer: I think it happens through various
channels. Of course propaganda on social media and
other websites is very important. I think it is not just
the propaganda in itself that motivates people. You
do not necessarily need the al-Qaeda propaganda to
motivate people to go to Syria; some of the regular
news reporting of what is happening there will
motivate some people to have the view that they are
somehow responsible for defending fellow Muslims
in need.

Similarly, social media affects recruitment simply by
linking people up—Facebook, for example. When
someone travels to Syria and posts pictures from there
and his friends see those pictures, those friends are
more likely to be inspired to go. That is not really
propaganda; that is just regular information conveyed
through online social media that then facilitates
recruitment. We should not focus too much on the
propaganda products themselves, but more on the
platforms from which the kind of information is
conveyed.

Q576 Chair: I started with Abu Suleiman al-Britani.
I want to end with this. The Daily Telegraph report
that British Muslims have carried out acts of torture
and possible executions in Syria, and they have posted
some of this information and footage on the internet,
with people being flogged with an iron bar. Is there
evidence that British people are involved in such
activities? It has been on the internet and we have
seen it on Facebook, but do you have evidence to
corroborate that?

Dr Hegghammer: Yes, I believe I do. Syria is the
most socially mediated conflict in history and there is
an enormous amount of audio-visual documentation
produced by rebels themselves, documenting the
things they do, and there is no shortage of proof that
foreign fighters are involved in serious acts of
violence and so on in Syria.

Chair: Dr Hegghammer, we are most grateful. Thank
you very much for joining us from Oslo to give your
views to this Committee. We may be writing to you
before the end of our inquiry with further questions
and we would be most grateful if you could answer
them, but we are extremely grateful to you for helping
us with our deliberations. Thank you very much
indeed.

Ev 88 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

Examination of Witness

Witness: Professor Sir David Omand, former Permanent Secretary, Home Office and former Director of
GCHQ, gave evidence

Q577 Chair: I welcome our next witness, Professor
Sir David Omand, GCB and former Head of GCHQ.
Thank you very much for coming. I noticed that you
were in the previous session, so we might be asking
you some questions about what we all saw.

Let me start with a question about Edward Snowden.
After the leaks in The Guardian you were quite
specific. You seemed to be quite angry over what had
happened and you said in a Times interview in
October 2013: “The assumption the experts are
working on is that all that information, or almost all
of it, will now be in the hands of Moscow and Beijing.
It’s the most catastrophic loss to British intelligence
ever, much worse than Burgess and MacLean in the
Fifties”. That is a pretty sweeping statement and it
goes well beyond what the head of MI5 and the head
of MI6 said in evidence.

Professor Sir David Omand: The second part of that
statement I certainly stand by. Indeed, what has
emerged since I said that bears that out, not only in
relation to the United Kingdom, but also in relation to
the United States. More has emerged about the
security measures taken by Mr Snowden to try to
ensure he had control of his material. It is still my
assessment that it is unlikely that intelligence services,
of the professionalism of both the Chinese and the
Russian services, have not found ways of accessing
at least some of this material. Even if it was heavily
encrypted, over a period of time they would be able
to uncover it. That is why in the same statement I
describe this as a “slow-motion car crash”.

Q578 Chair: It went much further than evidence
given by John Sawers and others to our sister
Committee.

Professor Sir David Omand: I have no reason to
believe that they would disagree with what I said. Do
you think—I should not ask you a question, Mr
Chairman, but let me put it rhetorically.

Q579 Chair: You can ask me anything. I have no
information on this. You were the Head of GCHQ, so
you have all the information.

Professor Sir David Omand: Let me ask the question
rhetorically of myself: can we think of any other loss
of intelligence information on this scale, where what
has been revealed already is damaging, but what is
potentially able to be revealed, from the totality of the
material, really would be devastating? My remark of
course was to the loss of the information.

Q580 Chair: I am sure, because the latest leak story
suggests that GCHQ had a covert unit that uses a
honey trap, trying to get people involved in sexual
liaisons, texting anonymous messages to friends and
neighbours to discredit targets from hackers. Such
activity, if it is happening—and presumably may have
happened under you, because there is no indication
that this is something that happened last week, so you
could well have been in charge of such covert
operations—do you not think that Parliament and the
people, through legitimate scrutiny, have a right to

know that their security services are involved in such
activity?

Professor Sir David Omand: Mr Chairman, just to
answer your innuendo first, I have no knowledge of
such activities, either in my time or subsequently. I
suspect that the piece of journalism to which you refer
requires some quite close scrutiny to try to work out
what it means exactly. On the thrust of the point about
Parliament, of course you are absolutely right. That is
why we have the Intelligence and Security Committee
of Parliament.

Q581 Chair: Yes, but the Intelligence and Security
Committee of Parliament is not elected, is it? Until
very recently the Intelligence and Security Committee
of Parliament, and other methods of scrutinising, have
conducted their business in private.

Professor Sir David Omand: I do not wish to intrude
on the private grief between two parliamentary
Committees, Mr Chairman.

Q582 Chair: I am not asking you to do that.
Professor Sir David Omand: It was Parliament itself
that gave greater powers to the ISC.

Q583 Chair:	Sir David, sorry, you are very

experienced: you were Permanent Secretary; you are
the mandarin’s mandarin, if I can put it like that. I am
putting to you a question; I do not want you to
adjudicate between parliamentary Committees. I am
asking you a question. Until recently this has been
occurring in secret, has it not? As far as I can
remember, when you were Head of GCHQ you did
not appear before the Intelligence and Security
Committee—because it did not have the powers it
does now—and give evidence in open session, did
you?

Professor Sir David Omand: Not in open session, nor
would that have been appropriate at all, in my view.
These are not matters for open session. That is why
in its wisdom Parliament voted the Act to set up an
ISC and subsequently give it greater powers, so that
it can be given the full facts in private.

Q584 Chair: So did you prefer the architecture that
existed at the time you were in charge of GCHQ?
Forget about the wisdom of Parliament—of course
Parliament is always wise. In terms of the way in
which you do your work, do you feel that it is a better
system now that the heads of these services appear
before the Committee, and do you think that there is
scope for extending it further? One of the points made
by Alan Rusbridger to this Committee is that because
the architecture of scrutiny is so poor, the only option
is that journalists have to produce this information so
that it is put in the public domain. You are no longer
the Head of GCHQ; you are a very distinguished
academic and you come here of your own free will.
Do you think that we should go that step further, as
they have done in the United States of America, where
their committees are able to question the heads of their

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 89

11 February 2014 Professor Sir David Omand

services much more regularly and with a much bigger
sense of scrutiny?

Professor Sir David Omand: I am personally more
comfortable with the situation we are in now, where
the Intelligence and Security Committee has, for
example, the right to demand papers rather than to
request information without any assurance that they
will actually get to see the documents concerned.

The Committee worked well in my day. The issues it
was dealing with were perhaps slightly simpler than
those of today. I think it was right for Parliament to
move on and to grant additional powers, but I would
have to say that, in my view, public hearings can only
have one purpose: that is so that the public at large,
and indeed the rest of Parliament, through the work
of the Committee, can see the moral fibre of the
people who are running these agencies. It is quite
inappropriate for the Committee to attempt to
establish, in public sessions, evidence about matters
that should not be debated first in public. I think the
Committee probably has an undervalued potential role
in checking out whether those who run the
intelligence agencies—not just the heads of the
agencies—share the values, which I hope we all do,
about a free and democratic society and have a proper
respect for privacy. That is something that the
experienced hands on the Intelligence and Security
Committee can establish. They can visit the
intelligence agencies, they can talk to junior staff and
they can get their own sense about whether these are
well regulated.

I would not accept that the American oversight system
has worked better than ours. I think ours has worked
considerably better than theirs. Indeed, there is some
anger in American oversight circles that they did not
get told everything they should have been told by the
Executive about what the National Security Agency
was doing.

Q585 Chair: Indeed; so you are telling this
Committee that, in your view, an open session with
the heads of the services before the Intelligence and
Security Committee is to look at the moral fibre of
those who are giving evidence.

Professor Sir David Omand: Yes, so that the public
can see in the flesh who it is that—

Chair: That they are good people?

Professor Sir David Omand: That they are good
people.

Chair: Very moral and upright people?

Professor Sir David Omand: Yes.

Q586 Dr Huppert: Thank you very much, Sir David;
it is very good to see you again. Tempting as it is to
dwell on US information security and how they
managed to lose so much data, I think we probably
should not. In 2012 in your book for Demos,
intelligence, you said:	“Democratic legitimacy

demands that, where new methods of intelligence
gathering and use are to be introduced, they should be
on a firm legal basis and rest on parliamentary and
public understanding of what is involved”. Do you
think we have managed to achieve that with the new
techniques that are available to use, now that more

and more information is online? Has there been
parliamentary and public understanding of it?
Professor Sir David Omand: No, and I think over the
last few years more could have been done to explain
on the one hand the purposes of investing in the new
technology in this way; and secondly, some of what
is involved. I say “some”, because there are limits on
how far disclosure should go. I am sure the
Committee will have looked at the code of practice
for the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act, which
is on the web. Does that give a clear view in common
language, plain English, of how it all works? It is
better than trying to read the Act itself, which is quite
difficult to follow, but I think more could be done.

I have been saying to some of my old colleagues,
“Why don’t you rewrite the code of practice, expand
it, explain the difference between communications
data on the one hand and content on the other?” That
would be a service in the direction of your question.

Q587 Dr Huppert: That sounds like a helpful call
for openness from the agencies. What more can we do
within Parliament to make sure that there is discussion
about this, as you have called for?

Professor Sir David Omand: Well-attended debates
on these issues when the Intelligence and Security
Committee produces its report would help. I do not
detect that in the past there has been that much interest
in this subject, but perhaps there are many more
interesting things for Parliament to be debating.
Showing interest I think is a good start.

Q588 Dr Huppert: One last question for now, if I
can, Chair. You talked about the distinction between
content and communications data. We have discussed
this here before. Do you really think it is a robust
definition, particularly given the definition under
21(4)(c) for subscriber data, described as
communication data so not content, “Any information
that is not traffic or user data held or obtained in
relation to persons to whom he provides the service,
by a person providing that service”? That means that
any information held by Facebook about me is
subscriber data, if I am communicating.

Professor Sir David Omand: No.

Q589 Dr Huppert: Where in the law does it say it
isn’t?

Professor Sir David Omand: I think that is in the next
section, which I have to confess is a little obscure. I
was the Permanent Secretary in the Home Office
when the Bill was put together and then presented.
The instructions to parliamentary draftsmen were to
make it technology-neutral, because everyone could
see that the technology was moving very fast.
Parliamentary draftsmen did an excellent job in doing
that, but as a result I do not think the ordinary person
or Member of Parliament would be able to follow the
Act without a lawyer to explain how these different
sections interact. The plain truth is that there has been
a major public misunderstanding over this—promoted
by the media—because communications data is
defined in the Act and the analysts and the intelligence
community have to follow the law in the Act.

Ev 90 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

11 February 2014 Professor Sir David Omand

Q590 Dr Huppert: I cannot find what you say in the
next section either. Could you write to us and explain
how the information I am concerned about—the
subscriber data—is excluded? If you can explain to
us, that would be very helpful.

Professor Sir David Omand: Yes; I am conscious
again that the Intelligence and Security Committee are
also looking at it. Perhaps the Clerks could get
together.

Chair: All right. It is possible for two Committees to
be interested at the same time; we do not all just do
the same thing following each other.

Q591 Paul Flynn: I want to ask about two matters
in my time in Parliament, the first of which is the
decision to join the war in Iraq in 2003, which the
security services and the Intelligence Committee were
cheerleaders for and supporters of. We now know that
that decision meant the loss of 179 British lives.
Those lives were sacrificed in the cause of trying to
protect the United Kingdom from attacks from non-
existent weapons of mass destruction. Do you think
that there has been some improvement now and that
the loss of confidence in the Committee and the
security services from that event—and another one I
will mention in a moment—has been repaired in
some way?

Professor Sir David Omand: Time has healed to some
extent, but it was a very significant blow to the
credibility of the intelligence community and we fully
accept that there were significant matters that we got
wrong.

I think you mentioned the Security Service in your
question. That may have been a reference to the Secret
Intelligence Service. I think Dame Manningham-
Buller gave evidence to the Chilcot Committee—as I
did—pointing out that in our joint Intelligence
Committee reports we had indeed made clear that the
consequence of intervention in Iraq would be an
increase in radicalisation domestically.

Q592 Paul Flynn: You accepted the likely existence
of weapons of mass destruction, did you not?
Professor Sir David Omand: Yes.

Paul Flynn: And you were wrong.

Professor Sir David Omand: Yes. Well, we believe
we were wrong.

Q593 Paul Flynn: Just another matter, if I can briefly
go into it. A similar, but even worse decision—which
a Conservative Member asked for an inquiry into
yesterday—was that in 2006, there was debate in the
House on the wisdom of an incursion into Helmand
Province, where at that time only two British soldiers
had died in combat. The justification for going in—
again, supported by the cheerleaders on the Security
Committee—was that we would be there for a
maximum of three years, end the growing of heroin,
which is now at a record level, and come out in the
hope that not a shot would be fired. It was compared
in the debate in the Commons as equivalent to the
charge of the light brigade. The person who did that
understated the situation because the numbers of
British casualties—lives that have been lost in
Helmand—are three times the numbers lost in the

charge of the light brigade. When we look back at
the record of the security services and the Intelligence
Committee, was this not a terrible mistake to support
Government at that time? Should they not have been
providing a check on the Government?

Chair: Thank you, Mr Flynn. A brief answer, because
we need to move on.

Professor Sir David Omand: We should look forward
to the publication of the official history of the Joint
Intelligence Committee, which at the moment is being
written by one of my colleagues at King’s College3.
I hope that will be published within a few months,
and that will perhaps set the record straight about the
overall balance between getting things right and
getting things wrong.

Q594 Paul Flynn: Would you answer the question?
Professor Sir David Omand: I had left Government
service by then. I do not think I have any way in
which I can help.

Q595 Paul Flynn: Has there been an improvement
that should increase public trust in the intelligence
services after these two calamities?

Professor Sir David Omand: I would simply point to
the number of terrorist plots—directly relevant to the
inquiry you are engaged in here—which have been
frustrated by the activities of the intelligence services,
and we are all safer because of it.

Chair: Thank you. Let us move on. We will come
back to you later, Mr Flynn; we want to move on to
other issues after your questions.

Q596 Mr Clappison: I think we all appreciate the
great debt of gratitude for the work that is done by the
security services, which we do not see, and some of
our constituencies close to London have seen the
consequences of what can happen when people travel
into London and get blown up on buses just going
about their day’s work.

Can I ask you another question on supervision and
parliamentary accountability? You said that MPs
could perhaps pay more attention to debating reports
and so forth. Can I raise with you one area where
something does seem to have gone wrong—and which
MPs certainly did take an interest in—and that is the
question of extraordinary rendition? I remember
colleagues asking question after question about
extraordinary rendition and being told that there was
no UK involvement at all. If you are told that, you
have the equivalent of the straight bat play and it is
very difficult to take it any further. We then find out
that that is not entirely the case. Can you give us your
view as to what went wrong with accountability on
extraordinary rendition?

Professor Sir David Omand: I am not in a position to
answer that. As I understand it, the police are still
conducting inquiries that are relevant to that. I really
do not think it is something that I should be
commenting on in public.

3 Note by witness: Dr Michael Goodman, The Official History
fo the JIC, Vol 1, London:	Routledge, with a

scheduled publication date of June 2014

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 91

11 February 2014 Professor Sir David Omand

Q597 Mr Clappison: You can understand the
frustrations of parliamentarians when we do ask
questions conscientiously and are given the equivalent
of a straight bat and it turns out not to be the case?
Professor Sir David Omand: That is a matter where,
again, the Intelligence and Security Committee have
produced at least two reports, so if parliamentarians
have concerns, I would have thought that they would
wish to direct them to their colleagues who sit on
that—

Q598 Chair: Can I just explain something to you
about the way in which Select Committees operate?
As a former Permanent Secretary, you ought to know
this. When we have witnesses here, it is open to
Members of the House to ask witnesses their
questions. You are not here to speak on behalf of the
Intelligence and Security Committee. Mr Clappison is
perfectly in order under the rules of Parliament—
which you have said is very wise—to put a question
to you. He is asking for your opinion, not the opinion
of the Intelligence and Security Committee. We can
get that at any time, because we see them every day;
he is asking for your opinion. We do not see you every
day; you are here as a witness and that is what he is
putting to you.

Professor Sir David Omand: I have just given my
opinion.

Q599 Chair: Sorry, what was that again, for the
record?

Professor Sir David Omand: My opinion is that it
would be wise for Members of Parliament who have
concerns about matters like that to raise it with the
Committee of the House that is already examining
these matters.

Chair: Sir David, that is not your opinion. We are
asking your opinion on the issue that has been raised
by Mr Clappison. As you have said, you have left
the Government service. You are supposed to be the
Professor of War Studies at King’s College, London,
and you have held all these great offices of state. As
far as we are concerned, you are an expert, and you
know very well when you come before a Select
Committee that the members are going to ask you
questions. This is not a tea party; this is a Select
Committee of the House. We know we can ask Sir
Malcolm Rifkind questions, and we know how to read
reports; Mr Clappison is asking you a specific
question. Would you like to put it again, Mr
Clappison—otherwise you will be in contempt, Sir
David.

Q600 Mr Clappison: I asked what you thought in
your opinion went wrong with accountability on
extraordinary rendition, when that was an issue before
the House. Did you think that something has gone
wrong?

Professor Sir David Omand: I do not think anything
went wrong on accountability, except that perhaps we
should have moved rather earlier than we did to
ensure that new guidance was issued and available to
members of the service, but the law on rendition has
always been very clear in this country. That was well
understood. Given the circumstances of our

involvements with the United States, I regard it as a
matter of great pride that there were not more issues
that arose out of that relationship. In fact, British
agencies and armed forces acted with enormous
discretion and common sense. That is my view.
Chair: That is a very helpful answer.

Q601 Mr Clappison: Put simply, do you not think
there is something wrong with accountability when
MPs who ask about it are told, “No, there is no
involvement at all in extraordinary rendition and
torture” and then it turns out to be the case that there
was some involvement? Surely there is something
wrong with accountability there.

Professor Sir David Omand: I do not think I can
answer that without getting into specifics and
specific cases.

Q602 Chair: So you have specific cases to tell the
Committee about, which we could take in private?
Professor Sir David Omand: No, but if you do not
have specific cases, then I think the whole discussion
is moot. If there are some specific cases, and those are
public knowledge—

Chair: The best course of action in respect of specific
cases is that we write to you privately about that. Shall
we do that?

Professor Sir David Omand: Yes.

Q603 Mark Reckless: Sir David, I do not see the
need to refer to specific cases. It seems to me that
what you are being asked was: is accountability okay
or were there any other concerns about it? You say it
is fine and there is no reason to have concern. Is it not
the case that MPs when posing this question were told
there was no involvement and it has since become
clear there was some involvement? How is it
consistent to say there is no problem with
accountability, when MPs were told there is no
involvement and it has become clear there is some
involvement?

Professor Sir David Omand: If we take the parallel
of military operations, we have a system of
accountability for the actions of our armed forces.
That does not, of itself, guarantee there will never be
mistakes made. I think we are talking about different
things.

Q604 Mark Reckless: You certainly were in your
answer to the question that I and Mr Clappison were
asking. MPs put questions about whether there was
any involvement from our security services in these
matters of extraordinary rendition. Was it not the case
they were told “No” and we now know there was
some? How can you then say there is no problem
about the accountability measures?

Professor Sir David Omand: If you are saying to me,
“Was the statement that was made to the
parliamentary Committee”—I do not have in front of
me exactly what was said at the time—“said in good
faith on the information available then?”, then I am
sure it was.

Q605 Mr Clappison: We were told this on the Floor
of the House. We were given answers that had no

Ev 92 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

11 February 2014 Professor Sir David Omand

room for any misunderstanding. We were given
absolutely categorical, comprehensive answers that
there was no involvement at all. It subsequently turned
out to be the case that there was and it has been
admitted that there was in specific cases. Can you
understand the frustration of parliamentarians who are
trying to hold Ministers or the secret services to
account and being told something that was not the
case?

Professor Sir David Omand: Yes, I can certainly
understand that. As I say, I do not think this
necessarily bears on the question of accountability.
Chair: That is very helpful.

Q606 Michael Ellis: Sir David, can I just go back to
a question that the Chairman put to you some time
ago, at the start of your evidence session? In relation
to Snowden, is it correct to say, from your very recent
directorship of GCHQ, that the Chinese and the
Russians, for example, are able to get into heavily
protected material that is even under Government
protection? In other words, do they have the means
and the ability and that—if you cannot answer that
question, let me put it this way—they seek to obtain
access to even the most heavily protected material? If
you answer that question in the affirmative, my
question to you is: do you believe that the ability of
journalists and individuals like Snowden is such that
they are capable of preventing foreign actors with
state assistance from obtaining access to their
protected documents?

Professor Sir David Omand: I think it is now quite
well documented—and I would refer the Committee
to the US report, the Mandiant report on Chinese
cyber-espionage—that indeed it is possible to attack
Government systems, even protected systems.
Through a combination of social engineering,
obtaining access through guile, and then the planting
of malign software, it is indeed possible to do that.
Defensive techniques have improved enormously, so
it would be possible, with enough effort, to keep
secrets secret. What you would not do in those
circumstances is employ someone like Edward
Snowden, and you would not give them the
untrammelled access that apparently his contracting
firm gave him. Provided you were sensible about that
kind of issue, then yes, I think it is possible to keep
secrets secret.

Q607 Michael Ellis: On the issue of oversight, I
think most people in the UK would accept that, for
obvious reasons, nation states do have to have secrets.
Have the unauthorised leaks and the media focus from
certain quarters had a negative effect on morale on the
hardworking staff—whom I commend—who work in
GCHQ on national security matters?

Professor Sir David Omand: Clearly, I can only
answer from the outside. My impression is that, yes,
it has been a bitter blow, particularly to see years of
work being exposed. There are concerns about their
reputation. They have been accused of breaking the
law—I do not believe they do or have done, but that
is a common accusation. They have been accused of
going around the back of the law, using the United
States as a back door to do things that British law

would not allow them to do. I do not believe that
is true.

If they are subject to those kinds of accusations—
including, I may say, by Members of your House—
this is inevitably not going to be good for morale. It
is not good, too, for families, and one has to have
regard for the fact that these are ordinary fellow
citizens. They go home; they talk to their families;
they are part of social groups. That cannot be
comfortable. In terms of recruiting, would parents
advise a young person to join an organisation that is
routinely accused of mass surveillance, which they are
not engaged in?

On the other hand, the upside is that I think they are
in a very well-led organisation. All the managers I
have met, long since my time, are extremely capable,
very intelligent and very sympathetic individuals, so I
am reasonably optimistic that they will ride this out.

Q608 Michael Ellis: My final point on this issue to
you is this. From your knowledge of the matter and
of GCHQ, do you believe that there will be serious
cost implications to the public purse in the
unauthorised leaking of information that in some cases
has been worked on for years by paid staff of GCHQ?
These are projects that have cost perhaps millions to
work on, staff who have been rostered to work on
projects for years and their salaries. Do you think
there has been a cost effect that will be very expensive
to the public purse of these issues?

Professor Sir David Omand: I think there will be a
cost effect. I would find it quite hard to know exactly
how you would calculate it. The technologies keep
moving, so you are continually reinvesting. What I
think is more concerning is a loss of intelligence, at
least for a period of some years. There will be less
information, less knowledge on which to base
decisions, whether these are military, political, law
enforcement decisions, or decisions relating to the
counter-terrorism campaign that is the subject of this
inquiry. All of that has a very heavy cost to the public,
but I find it quite difficult to know how to put a price
on it.

Q609 Lorraine Fullbrook: Sir David, can I ask what
you think of the offer of Huawei, the Chinese mobile
telecommunication company, to put mobile
communications free of charge in the London
Underground?

Professor Sir David Omand: It is not a matter I have
given any thought to. I am out of touch.

Lorraine Fullbrook: Really?

Professor Sir David Omand: I am out of touch with
the current debate over Huawei. I was involved during
my time at looking at how far that company should
be allowed to sell products into the critical
infrastructure, and steps were taken to ensure that we
are not wholly dependent on it.

Lorraine Fullbrook: That is really my question.
Professor Sir David Omand: I cannot specifically
comment on any of the arrangements made for
London Underground. I simply do not know.

Q610 Lorraine Fullbrook: Or any infrastructure,
then, that this company is offering free of charge in

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 93

11 February 2014 Professor Sir David Omand

the UK’s mobile telecommunications infrastructure.
Do you think that is a good thing or a bad thing?
Professor Sir David Omand: Under the right
conditions and the right kind of technical supervision,
perhaps it could be made to work. I cannot give you
a judgment; it would need a very careful risk analysis
before I would say, “Yes, that is obviously a good
thing,” but I would not rule it out just because they
are a Chinese company. They have a world brand to
protect and nothing would demolish that faster than
being caught planting some Trojan virus in a key
communication system. There are two sides to the
argument that would need to be balanced, and I am
not in a position to make that balance.

Chair: This is not an episode of Sherlock Holmes,
is it?

Q611 Mr Winnick: Sir David, we all know of the
ongoing threat to the security of our country from the
terrorists—7/7 of course and all that has happened
since abroad, and in Kenya very recently. Following
on from what Mr Clappison said about the
Intelligence and Security Committee and what
happened, did it come as a surprise to you that the
Master of the Rolls at the time, Lord Neuberger, said
this in a ruling in a case: “Some security service
officials appear to have a dubious record when it
comes to human rights and coercive techniques”? Did
that come as a surprise to you?

Professor Sir David Omand: Yes. Frankly, at the time
when I read it, I did not see the basis on which that
remark was made.

Q612 Mr Winnick: I am surprised that you should
say that, because a year earlier when the same case—
Binyam Mohamed—came before an American court,
descriptions were given of the tortures that he was
subjected to. His genitals were mutilated. He was
deprived of sleep and food and he was suddenly
transported from one foreign prison to another. No one
has suggested that British security officials were
participants in the torture. I have heard no such
allegation, but I have heard—hence Lord Neuberger’s
comments—that there was complicity. Should the
Intelligence and Security Committee not have been
aware of what was happening? At the time, there was
absolutely no report from that Committee of such
matters.

Professor Sir David Omand: If I might just ask for
clarification, do you mean aware at the time of the
activity or aware, because I take this—

Q613 Mr Winnick: We are told that the Intelligence
and Security Committee is briefed by security
officials. I could well understand they are not going
to necessarily tell the Committee about such
occurrences. If they were complicit, obviously one
would not expect them to do so, but should the
Intelligence and Security Committee not have probed
and investigated, because there were allegations that
were around before the court case?

Professor Sir David Omand: I simply do not know
whether they probed or not. If they did, it would have
been in private and I simply would not know.

Q614 Mr Winnick: You say you were surprised by
Lord Neuberger’s comments. Does that mean that you
worked on the assumption that no security service
person—MI5, MI6, GCHQ—would have ever, under
any circumstances since the end of the Second World
War, been complicit in torture?

Professor Sir David Omand: I certainly cannot say
that, nor about the armed services. The Public Record
Office from our colonial past has some disturbing
stories. If we are talking about the period after
Parliament decided to put the agencies on a statutory
footing, then I would be very confident that that is
the case.

Q615 Mr Winnick: Just a last question if I may,
Chair. If these allegations are correct—and Lord
Neuberger would hardly have made those comments
unless he had every reason and justification for doing
so, however much you disagree or were surprised by
his comments—what lessons should be learned? Apart
from the fact there should not be complicity and
torture, what lessons should the political masters take
from that?

Professor Sir David Omand: There are a number of
lessons that one must take from that. One is about the
education and training of those who serve our country
in those services, to ensure that they are under no
misapprehension at all about what is expected of
them. I believe that is done, but could more be done?
It is a question that could be asked. I think we should
look very hard at whether the boundary is clear. The
grey area, over what you call complicity, is the fact of
having a liaison between our service and a foreign
service overseas, which may be in a region that is vital
for our security, but whose conduct as an agency falls
far short than we would insist upon. Should we not
have such relations? If we do have such relations,
which are very much in our security interest, what are
the ground rules, and are we all clear enough about
what those ground rules are?

In response to Mr Clappison, I think I did say that
perhaps we should have moved rather earlier after 9/
11 to make doubly certain that the instructions and the
rules were clear. Eventually they were written up and
issued. Would it have helped the personnel on the
ground in a very far-flung, remote place, faced with
working with people whose behaviours would have
fallen short of our standards? It might have done, but
in the end there is human judgment here, and
individuals—particularly if they are out on their own
somewhere—are going to have to make judgments.

Q616 Mr Winnick:	You question the word

“complicity”, but surely the judgment should be
absolutely clear that British Security Service
personnel under no circumstances will be a party in
any sense whatsoever to torture, however dubious
some of those regimes are. Do you accept Have you
said that or not?

Professor Sir David Omand: With respect, I think you
have to define what “Be a party to” is. If the United
Kingdom Government has a liaison relationship with
country x, which is believed to, if not torture, then at
least treat suspects inhumanely, should we break off
relationships with that country? If we do have such

Ev 94 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

11 February 2014 Professor Sir David Omand

relationships with that country, how do we manage
that? If information from that country arrives with us
that bears directly on the security of our citizens, do
we refuse to read it? These are real issues. It is not as
simple as—

Q617 Chair: Thank you. That is very helpful. We do
need to move on; we can come back to this later if
there is time. Can I just say to colleagues, we have
two more witnesses after Sir David, so could I ask
everyone to put brief questions? Sir David, you are an
old hand at this, so brief answers, please.

Let me just turn back to the evidence of Thomas
Hegghammer and a statement you made in 2010 that
al-Qaeda was “on the wane”—I think you said—or
the influence of al-Qaeda was waning, and that we
must not give it any more impetus. Do you think that
the Syrian conflict has done exactly that?

Professor Sir David Omand: I am afraid I do, yes.

Q618 Chair: Are you concerned and worried about
the number of jihadists who are leaving our country,
going to Syria, and then returning, possibly, to be
involved in activities that put the lives of our people
at risk?

Professor Sir David Omand: Yes, I am concerned. I
am also concerned not just about numbers, but about
an aspect that did not come out in the earlier evidence
taking, which is the battle-hardened nature of the
individual who returns. If you see any of the videos
of the conflict—young men with an AK47, untrained,
simply spraying bullets around—and you compare
that to the terrorists who took over the Westgate
shopping mall, who were trained and hardened, and
who husbanded their ammunition, going from place
to place not killing randomly, but very selectively, my
concern is—

Q619 Chair:	Yes, so your concern is the

unprofessionalism. You contrasted two sorts of
terrorists: the professional terrorist—the one who had
been trained carefully to select victims—and perhaps
the unprofessional terrorist, who is going from the
United Kingdom, having seen this on the internet,
looked at it on Facebook, and ending up on the border
between Turkey and Syria—

Professor Sir David Omand—ending up as the
professional. In other words, the fighter goes out there
as perhaps a rather naive young man, but is battle-
hardened by a few months of intensive combat, picks
up all the training skills and comes back a very much
more dangerous individual. That is not to predict that
all of those who come back will be in that category.
Chair: Of course. We understand that.

Professor Sir David Omand: But it would only take
a very small number to cause a real problem.

Q620 Chair: I know that things have changed since
you have headed GCHQ and since you have been the
Permanent Secretary, but the fact remains that the best
way to stop this happening is to stop them leaving in
the first place. Do you think we have got it right? Are
we stopping enough of them leaving? Of course, we
have read about particular stories of people being
arrested even at the airport before they board planes

to go to Turkey, for example. Are we doing enough
to stop them leaving, to stop them becoming battle-
hardened terrorists?

Professor Sir David Omand: I can only estimate. I
think probably we are. Bearing in mind that some of
those who travel are travelling to other destinations in
order to finally make their way to Syria, it may not be
evident to the authorities what their ultimate
destination is. Some are travelling for humanitarian
purposes, and there is a balance in the law here that
has to be achieved.

Q621 Chair: We do not want individual cases from
you, but having headed GCHQ—you are the only live
witness we have, so to speak, who can tell us about
the way in which the security services operate—would
you know who these people are before they board that
plane, or would you know who they were only when
they got back? In other words, would they be under
surveillance? Would a proportion of them be under
surveillance?

Professor Sir David Omand: A proportion of them
certainly would, because they would already have
been picked up by the police and by the intelligence
services as people holding a particularly violent,
extremist view. They would therefore be under some
form of surveillance or, at least, were they to leave
the country that would then potentially flag it.

Chair: We understand.

Professor Sir David Omand: That could only be a
proportion.

Q622 Chair: We know this is only a guess—because
things have changed and you are only giving us a
guess today—but of the 400 or so who we know have
left our country, is there any way you can help this
Committee?

Professor Sir David Omand: I could not even begin
to hazard a guess, because I do not know.

Q623 Chair: Would it be less than 10?

Professor Sir David Omand: I simply do not know.
Chair: You would not know. Thank you very much.

Q624 Mark Reckless: Sir David, you have spoken
before about the importance of capacity building in
troubled states without relying just on military
intervention. To what extent would you say that the
FCO’s justice and human rights programme has that
succeeded in doing that?

Professor Sir David Omand: This is a work in
progress and results take quite a long time, but if we
were to look at, say, Indonesia as a country—where
both ourselves, the Australians and the United States
have put great effort in to try to build the capacity of
the Indonesian authorities to deal with violent
jihadism—they have been really quite successful. It
can be done, but it must be slow, patient work.
Building a judicial system that carries respect,
building a police service that does not torture—these
are all things that may take a lot of effort to achieve.
Corruption perhaps must be one of the most difficult
to tackle, because it is so endemic in a number of
countries, but if we do not reach out and try to help
then we are missing a part of the overall strategy.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 95

11 February 2014 Professor Sir David Omand

Q625 Mark Reckless: British policing generally has
a high reputation overseas. In terms of what you saw
of this capacity building and the systems, particularly
on the policing side overseas, did you feel that the
set of financial incentives for our police forces, or for
individuals involved, was sufficient to bring forth the
secondments and allocations of police to international
duties and supporting this type of programme?
Professor Sir David Omand: No.

Q626 Mark Reckless: What should be done to
improve them?

Professor Sir David Omand: A lot of effort over the
years has been put in to try to find different
mechanisms, but it is the case that if the Government
so decides to deploy the armed forces, they will
organise themselves and deploy in an orderly fashion.
If you want to deploy a couple of dozen police officers
in order to bolster the local effort, it is up to the
individual chief constables. There are mechanisms to
try to get volunteers; it is going to take quite a long
time. It is much easier to mobilise the armed forces
than the essential civil support that is needed. That is
also true of the fire service, although the fire service
in a different context has done a great deal overseas.
It is true in, for example, prosecution, with
prosecutors; it is true with judicial co-operation.
Given that we would always be talking about
volunteers here, it is a little difficult to see how you
could have a system that would guarantee you would
be able to deliver. Some action has been taken at a
European level. There are a number of countries that
have been introducing people. I think it is very helpful
for us to work with European partners on trying to do
this. Police support is essential.

Q627 Dr Huppert: Sir David, in your book in 2010,
you outlined six principles for intelligence, and other
people have articulated other sets of principles. How
do your six compare to the five Reform Government
Surveillance principles from the big tech companies
in the US, or the 13 International Principles on the
Application of Human Rights Communication
Surveillance? Have you done a comparison between
those?

Professor Sir David Omand: I have not done a
detailed comparison. I drew my principles essentially
from the just war tradition, on the grounds that all
intrusive intelligence activity carries moral hazard,
and it has taken us centuries to evolve a set of
principles for trying to tame the worst excesses of
conflict—principles like proportionality, necessity and
right authority. It strikes me that these principles do
apply to intelligence activity, which carries moral
hazard, either because it involves human intelligence,
with all the risks to individuals and their families, or
because it involves intruding into people’s privacy.
Secret intelligence, in my book, is information that
other people do not want you to have, so by definition
you have to overcome their will. Therefore, by
definition, there is always going to be some moral
hazard involved in intelligence gathering. How do we
tame this? Applying these time-honoured principles,
such as proportionality and necessity, is one way of
trying to do that.

Q628 Dr Huppert: If you do have a chance to have
a look at the others, I would be interested in your
comments on them and how realistic it would be to
apply other sets as well. One of the six points is about
proportionality. Point six says: “Recourse to secret
intelligence sources must be a last resort”. I think that
is quite an interesting approach. I had a look through
the various codes of practice from the Home Office. I
cannot see anything that uses those words or anything
I have spotted that is similar enough.

Professor Sir David Omand: I think there is a
reference in one of the codes of practice on
interception—you should look to see if you can find
out the information without having to get a warrant,
without interception. In other words, is it publicly
available or whatever? I cannot remember exactly
which code it is in, but I have seen such a reference.
I agree with the thrust of your point, which is that it
would be good to try to make these principles explicit.
I hate to mention the Intelligence and Security
Committee again, for fear of the Committee’s
response, but I did write to them and give them a copy
of these principles and say, “These are the principles
you should be applying when you are quizzing the
agency heads.”

Q629 Dr Huppert: There is some disagreement on
exactly what mass surveillance means—whether it
means looking at content or just processing and
parsing large amounts. How do you fit the idea of very
large-scale scanning of communications, at least, with
the idea of only doing it as a last resort? It seems to
me that if you are doing it so proactively, it cannot be
a last resort as well.

Professor Sir David Omand: No. I think the judgment
is that there is a class of information that is important
for security—for example, pre-emptive intelligence on
terrorism or serious crime—which you are very
unlikely to get any other way than by intrusive
investigation. You then say, “Where would we go to
get this information?” Increasingly, it is information
you will find on the internet, because that is where
everybody is doing their communicating. Therefore,
given that it is a global network and anyone’s
information is liable to pop up anywhere in the world,
you inevitably get drawn—at least in the present stage
of technology—into saying, “We are going to have to
gather in an awful lot of this, a big haystack or set of
haystacks, in order to try to find the bits we are
looking for, the needles we are looking for”. I think
that is the kind of logic behind it, but you certainly
should not be even going to start pulling out the
needle if that is information you could have found out
without intruding into somebody’s privacy.

Q630 Dr Huppert: It seems that if you are doing a
large-scale programme—I do not think anybody
doubts that there are large-scale programmes—that
means, when it comes to considering an individual,
you are not looking for alternative ways of finding
information about them. You are necessarily starting
off with your last resort of collecting this information
before you have even started considering that person.
It is suspicion, surely.

Ev 96 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

11 February 2014 Professor Sir David Omand

Professor Sir David Omand: On the face of the Act,
the analyst does actually have to be able to
demonstrate that what they are doing in trying to pull
out a needle of some wanted piece of information,
say from a computer that has been associated with a
terrorist, is necessary as well as proportionate. It
would clearly fail the “necessary” test if the
information could readily be obtained, for example,
by a Security Service operation directly with the
individual. For a lot of this, it is the only way you will
find it, if it is on the internet.

Chair: Thank you. I think we have spent quite enough
time now on looking for needles in haystacks.

Q631 Paul Flynn: In 2004, Mr Abdel Hakim
Belhadj, with his pregnant wife, was abducted from
Bangkok Airport, flown to Gaddafi’s Libya and
tortured. In 2005, Jack Straw denied that the British
Government had any involvement in renditions. In
2011, Human Rights Watch discovered documents and
published them which named the British MI6 agent
who they claim had boasted about this abduction, and
Jack Straw has subsequently said that he was advised
by MI6 on this. No one would have the knowledge of
this and the truth on this without Human Rights
Watch. Many other matters we would not have the
truth of if it was not for whistleblowers like Edward
Snowden. Do you not agree that we do need the
whistleblowers, and they do convey to the public the
truth of what is going on, rather than listen gullibly as
we are told—as I have been and as the Chairman has
been—that there was no involvement with
extraordinary rendition. We were lied to. Do we not
need whistleblowers?

Professor Sir David Omand: Let me say that a true
whistleblower, in accepted international convention,
has to exhaust his remedies. For example, Mr
Snowden could have gone to his employers—I
understand why he would not do that; I would not
press that point. He could have gone to the inspector
general, the independent figure of his organisation. I
would not press that point either. He could have gone
to Congress. Just imagine if Mr Snowden—flanked
perhaps by the editor of The Guardian and the editor
of The New York Times—had walked into the
Congressional Oversight Committee and said, “The
White House has kept from you and the Executive
have kept from you knowledge of a massive
programme of collecting data on American citizens.”
There would have been a huge political stink. I am
quite sure President Obama would have been forced
to issue the sort of statement that he issued a few
weeks ago.

Paul Flynn: He has.

Professor Sir David Omand: Mr Snowden would
have achieved his objective and he would not have
had to steal 58,000 British top-secret documents or
1.7 million—

Paul Flynn: There is very little time, so can I just
make two points?

Professor Sir David Omand—he did not do that, so
in my book he is not a whistleblower.

Q632 Paul Flynn: Monsieur Dick Marty, who is a
very distinguished Swiss MP, who was described by a

Foreign Secretary here to me as being a madman—he
was not; I know him very well. He was the person
who very bravely took up this issue in Europe.
Successive British politicians denied what was going
on. The question is: do we not have to rely on the
whistleblowers, on the Dick Martys, on the Human
Rights Watch, to get the truth? Otherwise we live in
ignorance, as politicians and the public. Of course
they supply this service to us, surely.

Professor Sir David Omand: I believe in a free press.
Under no circumstances will I want to muzzle the
press. If they can perform a public service in exposing
wrongdoing, let them do that. In a well-regulated
democracy, you don’t have to rely on the media.
Chair: Before we close, we do need to make progress.

Q633 Ian Austin: Do you share my incredulity that
Members of Parliament regard someone who flees to
China and then Russia as a source we are taking
seriously on internet and press freedom?

Professor Sir David Omand: I, too, swallow hard
when I hear these arguments.

Q634 Ian Austin: Would you agree with me that in
the past, when intelligence personnel have fled to
Russia with sensitive information, they have generally
been regarded as traitors and not whistleblowers?
Professor Sir David Omand: That is certainly true. I
do think that Mr Snowden did have a cause. His cause
was what he believed to be the unconstitutional
collection of data by the US Federal Government on
Americans—not about spying on anyone else—and he
is in a long tradition of American libertarians who
have not liked the idea of big government. He could
have achieved that objective, the whistleblowing
objective, without—

Q635 Ian Austin: Briefly, I agree with you about
that, but the question is not whether he had a cause.
You could argue that Blake and Philby and Maclean
and Burgess and all the rest of them had a cause. The
question is: is what he did justified, or has what he
has done put the security of public servants who
protect the rest of us at risk? That is the question,
I think.

Professor Sir David Omand: I am sure you are right
in your conclusion on that. Absolutely that is what
has happened.

Q636 Lorraine Fullbrook: Sir David, I would like
to ask about narcoterrorism. In north and particularly
west Africa, there appears to be a high degree of
synergy between terrorism and drug smuggling. Do
you think there has to be more resource focused on
the illicit drugs trade, or do you think the profits from
this drugs trade are negligible compared to other
forms of terrorist revenue, for example kidnapping of
foreign nationals?

Professor Sir David Omand:	It is only my

impression, but I think I am more concerned about the
connection between terrorists and serious organised
criminal gangs in relation to the crossing of borders
and smuggling of materials such as weapons than the
financing of terrorist groups—if you remember that
appalling attack in Spain, the Atocha attack, where the

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 97

11 February 2014 Professor Sir David Omand

explosives were obtained from criminal sources. In
future, too, it will be cyber-criminals who are
exploiting the internet for gain, but who might be
prepared to pass their techniques on or sell their
techniques on for terrorist purposes. I think the nexus
that you are talking about between serious criminality
and terrorism is one to take extremely seriously.
Chair: We have a final question from Mr Ellis. If you
can make it as brief as possible, please, which I am
sure you will do.

Q637 Michael Ellis: Sir David, just further to Mr
Austin’s very good points—if I may put it that way—
Snowden was no whistleblower, was he? He was a
traitor—a traitor to his country—but also someone
who, irrespective of what options were available to
him within the American system, stole 58,000
documents that were classified as secret and top-secret
by the British Government. He thereby endangered
British lives and British interests and British treasure,
and did so without regard to the other recourses open
to him that were not illegitimate. Would you agree
with that?

Professor Sir David Omand: Yes, I would.

Mr Winnick: You surprise me.

Q638 Michael Ellis: Some of my colleagues on this
Committee cannot resist interrupting my questions for
some reason, Sir David—I wonder why that might
be—but let us carry on.

Sir David, do you also agree with me that—contrary
to the paranoid reaction of some about the
surveillance state that you have already referred to—
those who seek to defend this country and its people
from terrorist activities and hostile forces should be
commended and applauded, and that the work of our
security and intelligence community is exemplary
when compared with those equivalents around the
world? Would you agree with me that this is an
opportunity for you to commend the excellent work
of those men and women?

Mr Winnick: What do you say to that?

Professor Sir David Omand: I am very happy to say
I am proud to have been associated with that group of
people. [Interruption.]

Chair: Order, Mr Winnick.

Professor Sir David Omand: Can I just add, though,
there is a serious category error in the reporting of the

Snowden case, which is to confuse bulk access to the
internet with mass surveillance of the population?
These are different things. There is no room filled with
analysts at GCHQ conducting mass surveillance on
the population, but it is now known publicly that they
have very considerable bulk access to data on the
internet. I believe that is what they need in the 21st
century to get the targeted intelligence they are
looking for, but it is not mass surveillance.

Michael Ellis: Thank you.

Q639 Chair: On the “Today” programme on 7
November, you said, about our collaboration with the
Americans, “We have the brains and they have the
money. It is a collaboration that worked well”.
Professor Sir David Omand: It was a joke.

Q640 Chair: But as far as you are concerned, that is
the central part, is it not, of the way in which we do
our intelligence: it is collaboration with Governments
that work with us and the sharing of information.
Professor Sir David Omand: It is a remark that has a
long historical resonance, going back to Bletchley
Park, when the United Kingdom discovered that it had
the brains—it had the ability with people such as Alan
Turing—but it simply did not have the means to
produce enough of the machines he designed that
would deal with the volume of material, and therefore
the secrets were entirely shared with the United States,
who provided the resources, to very good effect. Ever
since then, given they are five times our size, we have
been in a position where we have been able to hold
our own with innovation, with brainpower and with
access. They have been able to resource things—ideas
that we have had—but that we simply did not have
the public expenditure to develop.

Q641 Chair: There were no complaints from them
that they also had some brains?

Professor Sir David Omand: No. No altercation
whatever.

Chair: Sir David, thank you very much for coming to
give evidence today. You have been very helpful to
the Committee. I am most grateful. Thank you. Could
we have Sir Antony May, the Interception of
Communications Commissioner?

Examination of Witnesses

Witnesses: Sir Antony May, Interception of Communications Commissioner, and Joanne Cavan, Chief
Inspector, Interception of Communications Commissioner’s Office, gave evidence.

Q642 Chair: Sir Antony, we are going to canter
through these questions if we can, and we are going to
exercise great self-discipline on this side of the dais. I
want to start by asking you about whether the
Government has allowed the Intelligence and Security
Committee to have access to the confidential parts and
confidential annexes of your reports.

Sir Antony May: I am afraid the literal answer to that
is I do not know, but can I explain the background to
that? I hope you do not mind if I—

Q643 Chair: We do not need background; it is either
a “yes” or a “no”. If it is a “no”, then would you write
to us and tell us when this happens?

Sir Antony May: I can give a more helpful answer
than that. I was appointed in January 2013. After my
appointment, the report that my office is required to
produce for the Prime Minister for 2012 was
produced, and it had a confidential annex. The
question arose in the ISC, at a meeting that I attended,
whether the ISC could be shown that confidential

Ev 98 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

11 February 2014 Sir Antony May and Joanne Cavan

annex, to which the answer I gave was that I was
perfectly content on Sir Paul Kennedy’s behalf that
they should have it, but that the final say should be
with the Prime Minister, because the Prime Minister
would—

Q644 Chair: Where does that leave us today, then,
in answer to my question, “Have they received the
report?” You are quite happy for them to receive the
confidential annexes.

Sir Antony May: Yes.

Q645 Chair: You then passed it over to the Prime
Minister, so is it with him?

Sir Antony May: I think it must be with him. We have
made inquiries, and I am afraid we do not have—

Q646 Chair: You made inquiries of whom?

Sir Antony May: Of the Cabinet Office.

Q647 Chair: I will now write to the Prime Minister,
asking him what has happened to the confidential
parts of the report.

Sir Antony May: That would follow up where we
have got to.

Q648 Chair: I will send you a copy so you are aware
of it.

Sir Antony May: Thank you very much.

Q649 Dr Huppert: There are a number of questions
I have, but what do you think about the capacity that
you and others have? The Chief Surveillance
Commissioner, Christopher Rose, has commented that
he does not have any capacity left. How is your
capacity?

Sir Antony May: I would just like to say that I am in
the process of busily writing my report for 2013 to go
to the Prime Minister. I am intending to do this at a
substantially earlier stage in the year than has
occurred in previous years. That report deals with a
number of matters, and it includes addressing requests
as to whether my office and I have sufficient resources
to undertake the statutory functions that are imposed
upon us. That is an introduction. It will be in some
greater detail perhaps than I can give this afternoon in
this report, which we will deliver to the Prime
Minister, and I hope it will be laid before Parliament
before Easter. I can go on, if you would like me to.
Dr Huppert: Yes, that would be helpful.

Sir Antony May: The office that I inherited when I
took office had myself, Jo Cavan, my chief inspector,
five inspectors and two office staff. This was very
shortly after the parliamentary Committee that had
scrutinised the Communications Data Bill, which I
think at least two of the members of this Committee
were members, had looked at the sufficiency of my
office and my predecessor’s team to inspect
communications data, in particular under part 1,
chapter 2 of RIPA. The recommendation of that
Committee included that we should inspect at least the
large law enforcement agencies and everybody else
who acquires communications data on an annual
basis, rather than slightly longer as had happened in
the past.

The Communications Data Bill did not go ahead, but
that was a recommendation that I picked up almost
immediately that I took office. I decided then—this
was about a year ago—to implement that
recommendation, to which end we needed more
inspectors, and during the course of 2013 we recruited
three extra inspectors.

Q650 Dr Huppert: This is helpful. For example, of
the 570,000 requests for communications data, how
many of those were you able to assess?

Sir Antony May: It is an extremely difficult question,
for reasons that, to do it fully, require some detailed
explanation. I think this has been explained to this
Committee in written evidence by Charles Farr, but
it goes something like this. In a sense, 570,000 is a
misleading number, because it is 570,000
authorisations and notices under section 21 or 22—
whichever it is—of RIPA, but that does not, for
instance, tell you how many applications there were,
nor does it tell you how many people that referred to.

Q651 Dr Huppert: I think we do understand that,
and it is astonishing that the Home Office does not
know how many people it relates to or any of the
information you highlight. Presumably, you will have
looked at a certain number of the applications or the
authorisations.

Sir Antony May: Yes.

Q652 Dr Huppert: Your colleague is nodding. How
many is that? Is it half of the 570,000?

Sir Antony May: No.

Q653 Dr Huppert: Is it one-thousandth of it? How
many is it?

Sir Antony May: It is somewhere between 5% and
10% of not the 570,000, but the applications.

Q654 Dr Huppert: Which is a larger number.

Sir Antony May: Which is a smaller number—a
substantially smaller number—because research has
been done, Jo has undertaken research, so has the
Home Office actually, which has produced the
approximation that the number of authorisations and
notifications result from about one-third the number
of—[Interruption.] That is put very badly, I am sorry.

Q655 Dr Huppert: Are you saying that we do not
know how many applications there are and you have
to estimate it?

Sir Antony May: Yes, and the reason—

Q656 Dr Huppert: It is astonishing that there is no
log kept of each application, each authorisation,
otherwise—

Sir Antony May: Yes.

Joanne Cavan: There is no doubt that the information
is available within the public authorities, but it is not
easy to extract that information because there are
certain statistical requirements in the code of practice
that the public authorities are mandated to report to
us. Unfortunately, the number of applications is not
one of the current statistical requirements; so, as a

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 99

11 February 2014 Sir Antony May and Joanne Cavan

result, their systems have not been built around those
statistical requirements, so—

Q657 Dr Huppert: It seems perverse that they do
not keep track of that, and I hope one of our
recommendations will be that they do tell you how
many applications there are.

Joanne Cavan: It is something we have been looking
at this year, and we have conducted a short sample
with a number of the larger law enforcement agencies,
and that is how we can equate. We did report in last
year’s annual report we can equate that it is
approximately between 3 and 3.6 notices and
authorisations on each application.

Q658 Dr Huppert: Would you like us to recommend
that it be made clear that the information on
applications, authorisations and number of people
involved be made available to you because that would
really help with your job?

Sir Antony May: Yes.

Joanne Cavan: Certainly. We did write in our annual
report last year that that is one of the statistics that
should be collected.

Q659 Dr Huppert: On RIPA itself, do you have a
take on whether it is currently fit for purpose—
whether the definitions in it are clear and usable—or
do you struggle with it? Do you think it needs to be
updated in any ways?

Sir Antony May: If I may say so that is a very large
question that I am going to address to the very best of
my ability in this report, which I am going to produce
in April. It is a very big question and it has two
preliminaries. The first is that, as I think everybody
knows, it is an extremely difficult Act of Parliament
to get your mind around. I do not envy anyone who
tries to do this if they have not spent a great deal of
time on it. Therefore, it is really quite difficult to start
from what I regard as the most important starting
point; that is to say, to understand where we are at the
moment. As your previous witness has touched upon,
there is quite considerable misunderstanding about
where we are at the moment.

The second difficulty, which we are stuck with, is the
other side of the picture—that is to say, what the
intelligence agencies, the law enforcement agencies,
Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs, the Ministry of
Defence and the other agencies that have power to
apply for interception warrants actually do. What they
actually do is subject to extreme provisions of
sensitivity, so one cannot just write down and tell the
public what goes on. However, what I am attempting
to achieve in the report that I am writing at the
moment, is a greater openness on that subject than has
happened in the past.

Q660 Dr Huppert: Is your report—which we look
forward to very much—likely then to support a
rewrite of RIPA to make it clearer, as you are
suggesting? Is that something you would want to see?
Sir Antony May: There is a paragraph in the current
draft—I do not promise to leave it there, but I can tell
you about it—which says that I do not really see the
justification for Parliament spending a lot of time

trying to rewrite RIPA part 1 to make it clearer and
for no other purpose. It just seems to me to be a waste
of parliamentary time. It is a difficult subject, and one
would not just set about saying, “Here is a better
version of what we have”—

Q661 Dr Huppert: But you would to change it?

Sir Antony May: Yes. If there were major changes,
then it might well be a good idea to try to simplify
what we have.

Q662 Chair: Thank you. In 2012 there were 570,135
notices and authorisations for communications data.
In that time, 979 data errors were reported to your
office.

Sir Antony May: Yes.

Q663 Chair: Thirty-three of those errors were
identified during inspections.

Sir Antony May: Yes.

Q664 Chair: Why was it so low?

Sir Antony May: Because the agencies report nearly
all the errors that they make.

Q665 Chair: But why is your office not able to
identify more errors? Only 3% of the overall errors in
notices were identified by your office. What is the
point in having all these people working for you when
the vast majority of the errors are notified to you and
you do not find them out yourself?

Sir Antony May: The inspectors are doing very, very
much more than simply looking for errors. That is just
part of what they are doing. Why weren’t there more
of them? Because all the agencies have a statutory
obligation to report their errors to my office, and they
do so. The fact that they—

Q666 Chair: This does not cause you concern, the
fact that you have only picked up 3% of the errors?
Sir Antony May: No.

Q667 Chair: Previously, the offices of—

Sir Antony May: I am so sorry, Chairman, if I might
say, it is not that we “only” picked up 3% of the
errors; the 900-and-something have all been reported
to us in advance of the inspections.

Q668 Chair:	Previously, the offices of the

Intelligence	Services Commissioner and the

Interception	of Communications Commissioner

published the breakdown of the outcome of cases
heard by the IPT. This is no longer the case, and the
last time it was published was in 2011. Why is such
information no longer being made public?

Sir Antony May: By the tribunal?

Chair: Yes.

Sir Antony May: I am not aware that that happened.
I am sorry if I did not, but I do not have access to the
proceedings of the tribunal unless—

Q669 Chair: Sorry, Sir Antony: by the offices of the
Intelligence Services Commissioner and your office,
Interception of Communications Commissioner. We

Ev 100 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

11 February 2014 Sir Antony May and Joanne Cavan

have not had a statistical breakdown since 2011. Are
we wrong?

Sir Antony May: My office is separate from the IPT.

Q670 Chair: No, I understand that, but your office
has not published any statistical breakdown of cases
since 2011. Ms Cavan, why not?

Joanne Cavan: When you say “statistical breakdown
of cases”, can you elaborate on what you mean by
“cases”, please, Chair?

Q671 Chair: The cases that you considered in 2011.
Joanne Cavan: In terms of during the inspection, the
investigations we have looked at or the applications?
What do you mean by “cases”?

Q672 Chair: All of them. Do you publish all of that?
Sir Antony May: The question surely, as it relates
to—

Q673 Chair: Do you publish all of that information?
Joanne Cavan: We publish all of the information
around the findings of our inspections and the frequent
recommendations that we make. We publish the total
number of notices and authorisations that are reported
to our office. We have not as yet broken down the
notice and authorisation figures into individual public
authorities, so if you are talking about the usage
statistics for each public authority, to date we have not
published that.

Q674 Chair: The Investigatory Powers Tribunal sits
in secret for the majority of its proceedings, and has
only found in favour of 10 complainants in the 1,468
reported cases that it received between 2000 and 2012.
Only 10 complainants. Do you think that that
commands public confidence? If not, is it the fault of
the tribunal or Parliament?

Sir Antony May: Could I first make absolutely clear
that my office had no direct communication with the
tribunal? The tribunal does not tell us what they are
doing. The only obligation that I have, as
Commissioner, in relation to the tribunal is to provide
them with assistance if they ask for it. In the whole of
my time of 13 months as Commissioner, I have
received no request from the tribunal for assistance.
Accordingly, I am able to say to you that I really do
not know what the tribunal is doing, and there is no
reason why I should.

Having said that, the circumstances in which the
tribunal operates—this is just a comment from me—
are laid down by statute, and I would have thought
that if Parliament reckons it is unsatisfactory,
Parliament would do something about it.

Q675 Chair: So it is the legislature. Going back to
my previous question, previously your office used to
publish the cases of the IPT, but it no longer does so.
Sir Antony May: Certainly under present conditions,
there is no basis whatever for my office doing so. My
office is completely separate, now, from the IPT.
Whether two or three years ago there was some
communication between the two so that we published
something that they told us about, I am sorry, but I
simply do not know.

Q676 Lorraine Fullbrook:	Oversight of the

intelligence agencies is dispersed among various
bodies. There is yourself, the Intelligence Services
Commissioner, the Investigatory Powers Tribunal.
Would it not be simpler to have that oversight under
one umbrella and concentrate it in the single office
of the Inspector General, as has happened in many
other countries?

Sir Antony May: This was a question that was raised,
as you will know, in the Green Paper that preceded
the legislation last year. It was not taken forward, but
there is a whole annex to that Green Paper that raises
the possibility of having an Inspector General. I was
not central to the considerations that led to that not
being taken forward when that legislation was taken
forward, but I am told that it was considered to be
difficult and perhaps unnecessary.

Q677 Lorraine Fullbrook: Both of you will have a
personal opinion on this, so what would that be?

Sir Antony May: I think as follows. As you know,
broadly speaking, my statutory responsibility is
limited to overseeing what happens under part 1 of
RIPA—that is to say part 1, chapter 1, interception of
communications, and part 1, chapter 2,
communications data. This is a confined and well-
defined operation, which, now that I have spent 13
months finding out all that I need to know about it, it
seems to me is an operation that a single
commissioner ought to be able to look at and look at
properly. Whether we do or not is for other people to
look at, but it seems to me to be a parcel that is
usefully undertaken by one commissioner.

The suggestion that the intelligence services or a
wider spectrum of the subject matter we are talking
about should be under aegis of a Registrar General, or
something like that, would mean a different structure
and a much larger structure. One consequence of
that—at least one possibility that was discussed in the
Green	Paper—was	that the interception of

communications part of RIPA, part 1, chapter 1, which
I currently oversee, should be removed from my
oversight and taken, for instance, to a Registrar
General or the Intelligence Services Commissioner or
whatever. That might be a good idea, it might not be
a good idea, but one consequence of it would be that
the interception side of the entire spectrum would be
split in two, because we do not just oversee the
intelligence services; we oversee six other agencies as
well. It seems to me at any rate that that is an
operation that ought to be kept together.

There are other considerations, but one opinion that
perhaps I might venture—it is only an opinion—is
that it is quite important, I think, to have a
commissioner or commissioners who have a function
for which they can take personal responsibility.
Chair: We do have to speed up.

Lorraine Fullbrook: Yes, I will do.

Sir Antony May: If I could just finish the sentence, if
you do not mind. I think if there were a Registrar
General overseeing a wider spectrum of operation,
that personal responsibility would be diluted.

Q678 Lorraine Fullbrook: Ms Cavan, given your
current position and your previous positions, what

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 101

11 February 2014 Sir Antony May and Joanne Cavan

would your view be of a single umbrella, either
personal or organisation?

Joanne Cavan: My personal opinion would be that it
would be very difficult for one person to build up the
technical expertise and knowledge across all of the
activities. I think it works very well at the moment to
have specialist teams looking at interception,
communications data and surveillance.

Lorraine Fullbrook: Lovely. Thank you.

Q679 Dr Huppert: Presumably you are both aware
of section 94 of the Telecommunications Act 1984,
which gives powers to the Secretary of State to give
such direction of a general character as appeared to
be necessary in the interests of national security or
relations with the Government of a country outside
the United Kingdom. Do you supervise how that is
used, and if not you then, who does?

Sir Antony May: The Telecommunications Act does
not provide for oversight by me, just as the
Intelligence Services Act does not provide for
oversight by me of the intelligence services that—

Q680 Dr Huppert: Who does check it? It seems in
the Act that there is absolutely no supervision at all
of it. It is not revealed to Parliament in almost any
circumstances; it is not revealed to you. Ms Cavan, do
you have any experience as to who gets to check that
this is used appropriately? If there are no oversights,
all sorts of things could be happening.

Sir Antony May: I know the terms of this section, and
it is very wide. As you know, the terms of it prevent
disclosure unless the Secretary of State lays what she
is doing before Parliament. I think perhaps one ought
to say that, to the extent that I am not going to talk
about at all that she might or might not use that, we
would all be prevented from talking about it.

Q681 Dr Huppert: Ms Cavan, you have been in
various areas. Do you know of anywhere where this
is looked at?

Joanne Cavan: I do not. I am not aware in the
Telecommunications Act whether there is any specific
oversight built into that Act.

Q682 Mr Winnick: Can I just clarify the position? I
think you heard the last witness reply to one of the
members of the Committee and speak about the role
of whistleblowers and what should be done. He more
or less said, “If Mr Snowden”—this is the American
scene—“had gone to see the American President,” et
cetera, et cetera. I listened very carefully indeed to
that answer. What would be the position in the UK?
This is what I am not quite clear on. If you will clarify
that for me, and I know that you took over your job
at the beginning of last year. Is that correct? Yes. I do
not want to be patronising, but you certainly have the
most distinguished legal background. What I want to
ask you is: if someone is dissatisfied in the security
services, is it to you as the Commissioner that that
person would go, or to the organisation as such—to
the IPT?

Sir Antony May: Under the legislation, there is no
clear indication that someone who was troubled
should come to me. I would rather not expect them to

do so. So far as I know, they could certainly go to the
IPT, but they would have to formulate it, I guess, in
terms of a complaint to be adjudicated upon, or
something like that. I am not really very familiar with
this, but I think that whistleblowing is a subject that
has been dealt with—as I am sure you will know—by
the report that President Obama received quite
recently. I am talking from memory, but I think I am
right in saying that the tenor of the report was that
there should be a structure set up by legislation, which
would enable people in that situation to make their
point in an appropriate way. That is America. I do not
know what would happen here, but there are obvious
routes that somebody like that could take.

Q683 Mr Winnick: I do not think you were in the
room when I was asking questions about the
comments of the then Master of the Rolls when he
said, “Some security officials have a rather dubious
record”. That would have been in 2010.

Sir Antony May: No, I was in the room.

Q684 Mr Winnick: Yes, but you were not in your
present position.

Sir Antony May: I was not sitting here.

Q685 Mr Winnick: The criticism probably would
be: should the commissioner have then taken up not
the allegations, but the judgment made by the Master
of the Rolls and investigated accordingly? Would that
be the position?

Sir Antony May: Is this in the Binyam Mohamed
case?

Mr Winnick: Yes, the Binyam Mohamed case.

Sir Antony May: I was a member of the Court of
Appeal that decided the Binyam Mohamed case.
Judges normally do not talk about cases that they have
decided, and in effect say, “I have written my
judgment; you can read my judgment and I have
nothing more to say”. Having said that, two and a half
years later—I have not read the judgments recently—
I do not remember that the Master of the Rolls may
have said that. What I do know, which is probably
fairly obvious from the judgments, is that the three of
us wrote separate judgments. I did, and I am pretty
confident that I did not say what you are reminding
me of what the Master of the Rolls said. Having said
that, frankly, my memory does not assist me to be able
to answer the question further; I am sorry.

Q686 Mr Winnick: In your present function, if a
situation arises in the future, where allegations are
made—or more than allegations, because the Master
of the Rolls was not making an allegation; he was
making a judgment, as I understand it, and you were
involved in the court—should the commissioner then
say, “Well, something has gone wrong; it is my job to
investigate accordingly”, or not?

Sir Antony May: If it is within that commissioner’s
sphere of responsibility and if it is sufficiently serious.
If I may say so, I am going to be doing that sort of
thing in my report in relation to some of the
Snowden allegations.

Ev 102 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

11 February 2014 Sir Antony May and Joanne Cavan

Q687 Michael Ellis: Ms Cavan, can I ask you first
of all? You have given evidence, have you not, as a
forensic telecommunications expert in court, both for
prosecutions and defence? I want to ask you generally
about your opinion of communications data and the
value of that. In your assessment, do we need to be
able to resource communications data—the who, the
when, the how—as opposed to the content, which of
course communications data does not relate to? If we
had such ability to access communications data,
would it put us on an equal footing with the data that
we can already access about telephone records, for
example?

Joanne Cavan: In my personal opinion and from
previous experience working on investigations and
giving evidence in court, communications data is a
vital tool for prevention and detection of crime, and
also for national security and other purposes. I think
it is very useful to give corroborative evidence, and
there are also a number of cases I have worked on
where it has assisted the defence or undermined the
prosecution case as well.

Q688 Michael Ellis: It can exculpate people who are
accused of offences, as well as inculpate them?
Joanne Cavan: Yes.

Q689 Michael Ellis: The same question to Sir
Antony: do you agree? Is it your assessment that
communications data would be a vital tool in
evidence, both for the prosecution and defence?

Sir Antony May: There is no doubt about that at all.
I just have one, as it were, gloss on that—it is not a

gloss; it is unequivocal. 570,000 is a very large
number. The equivalent number this year looks as if
it is going to be rather less than that, but it will still
be above 500,000. I have a feeling that it is not only
very large, but possibly, overall, too large. The
difficulty is this—and I am really quite keen on this.
You can look at individual applications over and over
again, asking the question, “Are they necessary for a
statutory purpose? Are they proportionate? Could this
be achieved by other reasonable, less intrusive means,
and what is the intrusion that is going on?” You can
get an answer: yes, yes and yes.

Chair: Thank you. The final question, please.

Q690 Michael Ellis: I am sorry about the time
pressure, Sir Antony, but the number, you say, is
large—and it certainly sounds large when one puts it
as a block figure—but surely one has to compare it to
the amount of data that is in the ether, so it is a
percentage of how much is in existence that is the
relevant figure, not the bold figure in itself. Would you
not agree?

Sir Antony May: You would have a very large number
of noughts after the decimal point.

Michael Ellis: Exactly. Thank you very much, Sir
Antony.

Chair: Sir Antony and Ms Cavan, thank you very
much. I am sorry we have run a bit over time, but we
are most grateful to you. We will write to the Prime
Minister about the confidential parts of the report, and
we might have a copy in reply.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 103

Tuesday 25 February 2014

Members present:
Keith Vaz (Chair)

Nicola Blackwood
Mr James Clappison
Michael Ellis
Paul Flynn
Lorraine Fullbrook

Dr Julian Huppert
Yasmin Quereshi
Mark Reckless
Mr David Winnick

Examination of Witness

Witness: Richard Barrett CMG OBE, Senior Director for Special Projects, Qatar International Academy for
Security Studies, and Senior Vice-President, the Soufan Group, gave evidence.

Q691 Chair: Could I call the Committee to order and
refer all those present to the Register of Members’
Financial Interests, where the interests of members of
this Committee are noted, and could I remind the
Committee that we are having this evidence session
as part of our inquiry into counter-terrorism?

Richard Barrett, thank you very much for coming.
You have flown all the way from the United States,
and we are most grateful for that.

Richard Barrett: It is a pleasure to be here.

Q692 Chair: We, of course, as a Committee have
very good knowledge of the Soufan Group and we
were grateful to Mr Soufan for arranging for our visit
to your centre in Qatar. That was as a result of a
previous inquiry; we are now looking at counter-
terrorism as a whole. Could I start with the issue of
so-called foreign fighters, British citizens who are
going abroad to fight in Syria? There is an estimate
that 366-plus British citizens have gone abroad. The
concern is that when they come back, they involve
themselves in domestic terrorist activities. While they
are abroad, they are involved in terrorist activities to
do with Syria, as in the case of Mr Abdul Waheed
Majid, who is the first British citizen to die in a
suicide bombing. What can we do about these foreign
fighters leaving the country?

Richard Barrett: My own view is that we need more
analysis of the nature of this threat. You are absolutely
right that hundreds of people are going from Western
countries and, indeed, many more from non-Western
countries, to Syria to join rebel groups. But although
there has been some sort of effort at making a
numerical assessment of the foreign fighter
phenomenon, there has not been very much
opportunity yet to make a qualitative assessment of
what it means to go and fight, and what it means to
come back. If you think of the people who have
returned, one would have to say, “Why did they
return?” Were they horrified by what they saw, or
inspired by it to go and do something in their home
country?

I think the assumption that everybody who goes
abroad to Syria to join a rebel group and fight is
inevitably going to be a terrorist threat when they
come home, if they do come home, goes much too
far. I think you had Thomas Hegghammer talking to
you not very long ago, and his examination of the
historical experience of people going to battlefields

abroad to fight and coming home was that it was a
strong indicator of the possibility of terrorist action in
the future, but maybe about one in nine or so of those
people were involved.

Q693 Chair: Do you subscribe to that one-in-nine
ratio?

Richard Barrett: I respect Thomas and I respect his
research, but I think with Syria it is a little different.
Look at all the videos and everything pushed out by
people in Syria. You mentioned some British people
who were there, and certainly there are several British
people who put videos on YouTube with them holding
an AK47 or whatever—you know what I mean—
encouraging their friends to join them. That to me
suggests that this is more bravado. This is more,
“Look what I am doing. Why don’t you come and join
us? It’s a great adventure” type of thing, rather than,
“Come here and train to be a terrorist so we can”—

Q694 Chair: There has been reported criticism of the
jihad tourists, and those who are there as hardened
terrorists have tried to stop them coming. But one way
they can be stopped from going is, of course, by
seizing their passports. I do not know if you know
that Moazzam Begg, who was one of those in
Guantanamo Bay, was arrested earlier today by the
West Midlands police, and his passport was removed
by way of royal prerogative. Presumably these people
are being watched by the security services, so there is
a way of preventing them travelling by removing
passports.

Richard Barrett: Yes. I think it is difficult, though—
is it not?—with all counter-terrorism to have laws that
are enacted against somebody or to somebody’s
detriment before they have committed a crime on the
worry that they might commit a crime. That rather
flies in the face of fundamental rights. Nonetheless, I
am sure the security services are very aware of people
who are already high-risk, and who may be planning
to go abroad. Similarly, when they come back, they
need to be able to focus their attention on those people
who might be a significant risk rather than everybody,
because obviously the resources you would need to
cover everybody would be impossible.

Q695 Chair: On the BBC News on 30 January, you
talked about the necessity of focusing, and taking a
much more targeted approach, rather than the wider

Ev 104 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

25 February 2014 Richard Barrett CMG OBE

approach adopted by the Americans. Do you think we
have that targeted and focused approach here?
Richard Barrett: I am not so familiar with what is
being done here, but the security services, of course,
have to focus their approach because of their limited
resources. I am sure they are looking for as many
ways as possible to make that focus as sharp and as
accurate as possible. The Soufan Group, as you
mentioned, are starting a project funded by the Dutch
Government to try to survey what the groups are in
Syria. What does it mean to say you joined Ahrar al-
Sham or Jabhat al-Nusra or something? What does it
mean? You have some sort of baseline understanding
when somebody comes back and they say, “I joined
that group rather than that group.” You can quantify
what the influences are, what the ideology is, what the
objectives are. Then at the same time try to do a
survey in countries where fighters have returned from
Syria, to try to ask them or ask people who know
them, “Well, you know, how has this guy changed?
What are his thoughts about his own country?” That
may not be particularly useful, but I think it will help
in looking for indicators—red flags, if you like. That
might help focus.

Q696 Chair: Let us move from the individual to the
global and the issue of capacity building. We have
taken evidence from many people and many groups.
The concern I have is there seems to be no
international structure to deal with terrorism. You
have, of course, Interpol; Interpol was involved in the
efforts in Algeria to rescue the hostages there. There
is Europol, dealing, of course, with the EU countries.
But there seems to be no international arena where
countries can come together to deal with this terrorist
threat. Do you think there ought to be an overarching
structure that deals with counter-terrorism?

Richard Barrett: Interpol and Europol, and police
forces generally, co-operate around the world to
discover, detect and prosecute criminals, so people
who have performed a criminal act under international
jurisdiction, in the case of Interpol or Europol
perhaps, do fall under that. But when you have the
amorphous threat of terrorism, I think there has to be
some sort of slightly different association. You get, of
course, very close collaboration between intelligence
and security services around the world that is not
structured in the way you say, although there are
informal structures.

If you are suggesting there might be a formal
international structure beyond the United Nations—
and the United Nations, of course, tries to set up these
structures—I think they would have to focus on issues
like why people are becoming terrorists, and what you
can do to help the capacity of countries that are
particularly vulnerable to terrorism, rather than
dealing perhaps with counter-terrorism itself, which
sounds more muscular.

Q697 Chair: It should be part of the UN, rather than
a newly created organisation?

Richard Barrett: I would have thought so, yes, and
that means it comes much more into the rights area
than the coercion area.

Q698 Chair: Finally, the Government, in their
evidence to us, said that they had set up a fund, a £30
million counter-terrorism programme fund. Are you
familiar with what this fund does?

Richard Barrett: There are several funds set up, as
you know. There is a UN Counter-Terrorism Centre
now that has been promised $100 million by the
Saudi Government.

Q699 Chair: I am talking about our Government.
Richard Barrett: Your Government? I am so sorry. I
do not know what the UK does, but I think that every
action a Government takes can be read into the
terrorist narrative. If you have a huge military
spending budget, for example, and you are militarily
active, that can be seen as maybe in a way a counter-
terrorist action and a pro-terrorist action. If you have a
big social welfare programme abroad or something—a
huge fund for that—that could be seen as a counter-
terrorism measure as well. Giving labels to funds and
activities I think is quite difficult.

Q700 Chair: Yes. Would you tell this Committee that
capacity building is very important, as far as reducing
the threat of terrorism goes?

Richard Barrett: Capacity building in some areas I
think is very important. I think it is very important to
encourage people to act by the rule of law and so on,
of course, building capacity overseas from the point
of apprehension to the point of verdict, if you like, so
that the treatment is correct. A terrorist, after all, sees
the state as his enemy, and therefore if the enemy is
responding to the terrorist in a way that they would
respond to any citizen, that slightly undermines the
narrative. We know, of course, of examples of people
who have been rather surprised by their treatment by
Government in a positive way, which has tended to
de-radicalise them. Similarly, of course, if you treat
people badly, they become more radicalised. I think
capacity building just in the sense of awareness and
understanding is enormously important.

Q701 Mr Winnick: Recognising the dangers of
those who go to fight in Syria and then come back
with an aim of inflicting terror in their own country,
namely Britain, is there not a possibility the other way
round: that those who may go with the best of motives
because they feel very strongly about the disastrous
and monstrous Assad regime find among the jihadists
that it is rather different from what they thought—the
divisions, the extremism, the contempt for human life?
Is it not possible that some of those people coming to
that view will come back with a very different view,
not about the Assad regime but about the sort of
people who went out to join?

Richard Barrett: Absolutely; I could not agree with
you more. I think that is very true. Some people can
go out there and become brutalised, dehumanised, and
radicalised by the company they keep, and other
people can be revolted by that and say, “I do not want
anything to do with this.”

Q702 Mr Winnick: Since it is 100 years since the
First World War and that has been already spoken
about, I will refer to the other war, which took place

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 105

25 February 2014 Richard Barrett CMG OBE

in the 1930s. It is a fact that many who went out as
communists, and in some cases took leading positions
as communists, came back to Britain no less anti-
fascist. Their hatred of fascism remained but they
were anti-communist—not simply Orwell but others.
As I say, they were perhaps not great in number, but
they saw the brutality and how, if you like to use the
term, the Stalinists behaved in Spain and their
contempt for human life. This could be the same
possibly with those going out to Syria.

Richard Barrett:	Yes, absolutely, and all the

recruitment videos you see are about the glory of
fighting and all this, and it is all wonderful. It is a bit
sort of TV, in that there is no blood, there are no
injured, there are no grieving mothers or abandoned
children or anything else like that. But the reality of
any conflict, of any fighting, of course, is not that; it
is quite different from that, and I think that, indeed,
many people, one would hope, would come back
completely disillusioned by pursuing politics in that
way. Although on the other hand, as you say, the
Assad regime is—barrel bombs have been declared a
war crime now by most observers and this is also a
horrific thing that you may feel you want to resist and
fight against.

Q703 Yasmin Qureshi:	The Chair mentioned

capacity building. How would we measure the
effectiveness of capacity building projects?

Richard Barrett: I think it is an enormously important
question, really important: how do you measure
impact? I do not mean to say you should not do
something because you cannot measure the impact,
but I think you should make absolutely every effort to
measure the impact, because after all you are talking
about taxpayers’ pounds or whatever, and this should
be spent responsibly.

One of the problems around funds and projects and so
on that are designed away from the country that is to
be the beneficiary is that, first of all, the designers are
not closely enough in touch with what is going on on
the ground, but nor are the implementers—or,
furthermore, the people measuring the impact. It is
very difficult to say whether something was effective
or not, and I think the more you can get your funds
into the hands of local partners who are working on
the ground in the community and measure what
happens as a result of that work, clearly the better.
That means you are not spending £30 million, but you
are spending maybe £30,000, because there are
community groups who cannot absorb huge amounts
of money. Then there are all sorts of knock-on effects
about administrative costs and everything else. I agree
with you: I think it is absolutely fundamental that we
find better metrics for deciding whether these counter-
terrorism programmes are effective or not.

Q704 Yasmin Qureshi: Can I ask you to give an
example of where perhaps there has been successful
evaluation of the effects, and some situations where it
is impossible to work out whether any measures have
been ineffective?

Richard Barrett: In countering terrorism, because you
are trying to stop something happening, you can never
tell how successful you have been. It goes without

saying, but I think conceptually you can think, “Okay,
I want to do capacity building on border security”.
You might say that Mali is a problem. Mali has a
border of about 7,500 kilometres. Most of it is straight
lines. Most of it follows no geographical feature or
anything else like that. In most of it, the families and
the tribes move across without noticing they are in
one country or another. What does it mean, therefore,
to do border security? What sort of impact are you
expecting from that?

If you are saying, “I want to make sure that anyone
coming through the airport is properly documented,”
well, that is okay. But then you might say, “Is that
going to impact on the terrorist threat coming out of
Mali or going into Mali?” Whereas if you are doing a
project of, say, leadership skills or critical thinking
skills or vocational training or something like that in
the community, you can see some impact, because the
economy might build up slowly in the community.
People might be less radical in their attitudes. They
might be more questioning of the things that people
told them and so on, so you can say, “Yes, we can see
that this is having an effect”.

Q705 Michael Ellis: Mr Barrett, as far as the United
Kingdom’s justice and human rights partnership
programme is concerned, do you think it is sufficient,
from what you know, in terms of capacity building, as
we have been talking about that, or is there more that
the UK Government could do? I know to a large
extent there is always more that any Government can
do, but how do you rate the sufficiency, in terms of
capacity building at the moment? There have been
suggestions from some quarters that developing more
resilience in areas such as border security and anti-
corruption would benefit the whole global counter-
terrorism effort. Do you think the UK is particularly
well placed to undertake this sort of work?

Richard Barrett: In some areas, yes, they do. For
example, if you think of Pakistan, where a lot of the
UK aid goes, there is a very close historical link
between the United Kingdom and Pakistan, and many
people of Pakistani origin are living in this country
and take a great interest in what goes on in Pakistan
and vice versa. On capacity building projects there,
whether they are sufficient or not is under debate. It
would take an awful lot to turn Pakistan into the sort
of state that we would all feel very comfortable with.
But that is the nature of Pakistan. It has a different
cultural basis and history from our own. The fact that
you are doing something that is clearly meant to
benefit the people of Pakistan is surely a good thing,
whether it is sufficient or not. It would be nice to be
able to do more, but the argument that it is not
sufficient is certainly not an argument for not doing it
at all.

Q706 Michael Ellis: Do you think the historical
connection this country has with many
Commonwealth countries around the world, as well as
the language and other heritage connections we have
with other countries, position the United Kingdom
very well, in terms of being able to make a strategic
difference in its counter-terrorism activities, and that

Ev 106 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

25 February 2014 Richard Barrett CMG OBE

it is accomplishing those goals satisfactorily or
relatively well?

Richard Barrett:	I certainly think the United

Kingdom has a responsibility. We are a permanent
member of the Security Council, we pride ourselves
on our parliamentary democracy and so on, and we
reckon that we have a set of values that are more or
less identifiable and are generally for the public good.
I think we have a responsibility and obligation to do
what we can, and I guess we should start in the
countries where we have some sort of cultural and
historical affinity, for example in the Commonwealth.
I think it would be arrogant to think that our
intervention was going to be fundamental to the
success or failure of a project. I think we should in
many cases probably be guided by the local conditions
and immediate demands of the state itself.

Q707 Michael Ellis: You were involved in counter-
terrorism at the time of 11 September 2001, were you
not, at a senior level in this country? Would you
recognise that the efforts of successive Governments
since 2001 have seen a sea change in the way that
these matters are approached by the British
Government, and that the sea change is very much for
the better?

Richard Barrett: Yes, definitely I would agree with
you there. Security is a national responsibility, is it
not? It is not an international responsibility. I think we
all agree on that. But the thing that changed with 9/11
was the sense that your security affects my security,
that this is a global problem. It is no longer purely a
national problem, and therefore you should all join in
to the extent of our capacity to be able to help. That
has led to a completely different climate and approach
to terrorism, and I think that has had a beneficial effect
on various other areas of endeavour.

Q708 Mr Winnick: The Cold War lasted about 40 or
45 years. If you had to give any kind of assessment
or guess—because we can only guess—how long do
you think humanity will have to face this challenge of
international terrorism?

Richard Barrett: I do not think we will ever see the
back of it, just as it has always been present through
history, depending on how you define terrorism. But
that sort of asymmetrical warfare—non-state actors
involved in violence to coerce a Government by
intimidating the public—I think is going to be with us
for a very long time. I think it just goes in waves. We
hit a high wave and now, in my opinion, that wave is
descending; it is coming down again, because in fact
terrorism is becoming less and less distinguishable
from insurgency, and I think insurgency is something
else. The terrorism we worry about is attacks here on
the Underground and the bus in Russell Square in
2005 and so on, whereas the insurgency sort of thing
is much more worrying in terms of geopolitics, but it
is not so worrying perhaps in the traditional sense, in
terms of how we suffered all those years with the IRA
and so on.

Q709 Mr Winnick: Is the end likely to come about
through exhaustion or splits, rivalries and the rest? Is

that likely, in your view, to be the position? That they
cannot win, rather like the IRA coming to that view?
Richard Barrett: I think the IRA was very strongly
motivated, and they were able to make new recruits.
That is a crucial thing: to be able to make new
recruits. To a certain extent, the al-Qaeda related
terrorists are able to make new recruits because there
are so many people around the world who have those
feelings of alienation or powerlessness or
discrimination against them, or whatever it may be
that may make them susceptible to joining a group
like that. Those motivators may make you join
something, but they may not turn you against
something. I think with the traditional terrorist groups,
it is very important to define them by the nature of
the enemy and that becomes hard. If you are fighting
in an al-Shabab or if you are fighting in Syria or Iraq
or something, your enemy is very local.

Q710 Nicola Blackwood: I just wanted to follow up,
Mr Barrett, on some comments that you made to
Yasmin Qureshi regarding funding community groups
and capacity building via that route. I believe that you
wrote an article in 2013, after the Westgate attack in
Nairobi, about the Global Fund for Community
Engagement and this $200 million over 10 years, the
idea being to fund grass-roots community groups. I
am just wondering how you ensure that those groups
are able to access this funding. In my experience, the
problem is ensuring that there are tendering processes
that are accessible to groups, in the right language and
on platforms that are accessible when internet access
is not necessarily possible, and then how you can
track that, monitor that spend.

Richard Barrett: You are very perceptive, because I
think that precisely the problem of the fund is that the
people you might want to support may never have
heard of the fund, and may never get to hear of the
fund. Even if they did, they would not know how to
apply for grants and so on. They are not accustomed
to that sort of grant giving. Also, in many countries
where there is a particular problem of violent
extremism, of course, the civil society groups are not
particularly trusting of Government and nor is
Government trusting of civil society. The fact is that
the Government is going to have to be involved in
these grants. You cannot give an international grant to
a group that the Government is virulently opposed to
or thinks is no good. That is also going to make it
very difficult.

Also, your colleague Michael Ellis mentioned
corruption and the difficulty of giving grants to
countries where there is a great deal of corruption—
making sure that it goes to people who are going to
use it properly, rather than to somebody’s brother-in-
law or whatever. That is another factor. There are huge
problems in getting the money down to the grass-roots
level that you want to engage.

Q711 Nicola Blackwood: In every case would you
go via the state, or in some cases would you go
directly via civil society to grass-roots level?

Richard Barrett: The idea is that you engage civil
society, you empower civil society and that civil
society becomes a partner in this whole endeavour.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 107

25 February 2014 Richard Barrett CMG OBE

That is going to help because it will trickle down. In
most countries, civil society knows who the other
groups are, do they not? They know who is good and
who is bad, so once you can get over that hump of
the country committees that have Government
representation, and once you can get over their
potential stranglehold over the delivery of funds, I
think it should be successful. That is why I am very
much in favour of this fund. I think it is something
we ought to be pushing.

Q712 Nicola Blackwood: My question is, does the
fund route all its money via states, or does it go
directly to civil society?

Richard Barrett: Sorry, I did not hear you properly.
The idea is that the application comes to a country
committee, and the country committee has
representatives of Government, of international
organisations that are in the country, and of civil
society. Then they look at the project and say, “Would
we support this or not?” Then there is a governing
body in Geneva, as it will be, that keeps an oversight
of the whole thing. Then it goes back to the country
committee,	and without country committee

agreement, I think it would be quite difficult to get the
funds down to the grass-roots level.

Q713 Lorraine Fullbrook: Mr Barrett, given the UK
Government’s investment in capacity building, in your
opinion is this money best spent in unilateral projects
run by Her Majesty’s Government, or would it be
better to	channel it	through	multinational

organisations such as the Global Counterterrorism
Forum?

Richard Barrett: The UK does both, of course, and I
think that there should be a bilateral programme,
because that is an important part of your bilateral
relationship with a Government, is it not? If you are
going to give money, you might as well have some
political benefit from it; I think that is entirely fair.
But I think also there is something about aggregating
funds under one heading and having a whole group of
countries agree that this is a more needy cause than
that; your funds inevitably become a little more
anonymous in that case.

Q714 Lorraine Fullbrook: But we should do both?
Richard Barrett: Definitely I would carry on with the
bilateral; after all, our reasons for giving money are
essentially UK reasons, are they not? However
amorphous they might be, they are still UK reasons.
Those reasons will remain, and will satisfy that need
to support our policies more broadly by giving
bilateral aid.

Q715 Paul Flynn: Is Afghanistan 2014 mission
accomplished?

Richard Barrett: What was the mission? If the
mission was to destroy al-Qaeda, then I suppose it
is partly accomplished. If the mission was to rebuild
Afghanistan, then I do not think it was accomplished.
If the mission was to destroy the Taliban, then it
certainly was not accomplished, and if the mission
was to somehow instil some stability into Central
Asia, also I do not think it was accomplished. I think

this is a situation we are in now that was
unforeseeable, of course, in 2001. Wars have
unintended consequences, do they not? Certainly there
have been many unintended consequences in
Afghanistan.

Q716 Yasmin Qureshi: Kicking on from the
question of Paul Flynn about Afghanistan, and I do
not honestly want to get into a debate about this, you
were saying that the consequences people were not
aware of in 2001 and what was going to happen. But
as you know, even when we were sending our troops
in, there was quite a strong body of opinion that said,
“Look, something is going to happen if you do this”,
and all those things have happened. Afghanistan has
happened, whatever has happened, but for other areas
where we get involved in conflicts and things, is it not
about time that international communities and
Governments at large looked at the opposite opinion
given to them about a particular geographical area and
said, “Do not just look at it in one way. There is the
alternative narrative here on the problems”? For some
people like me, what happened in Afghanistan came
as no surprise. What is happening in Iraq comes as no
surprise. A lot of people are saying those things. Is it
not time for the international community, perhaps, and
organisations like yours and others who are guiding
them and advising Government, to think, “Hang on,
there is another perspective and perhaps we should
look into other opinions on these conflicts when we
enter into them”?

Richard Barrett: I am sure a responsible Government
listens to all opinion and takes it into account. But
there has to be a decision made, and that decision is
a political decision. I am not sure that it is an entirely
rational decision, because you do not have all the facts
at your disposal. I think also in the United States
where I live almost all my time, everything is an issue
of domestic politics. It does not matter whether it is
Iraq or Afghanistan or anywhere, it is about domestic
politics. It makes it very complicated for Governments
to sit down and take into account all the opposing
views, all of the historical relevance and so on of what
they are trying to do. It would be a great world if that
happened, but I do not see it coming about anytime
soon myself. I hope you are more optimistic.

Q717 Chair: Thank you. Just two quick questions
from me. Turkey has been identified as a country that
seems to be a gateway for people going to Syria,
Afghanistan and other countries. Do you think enough
has been done by the Turkish authorities to monitor
and stop this activity?

Richard Barrett: I think so now. The Turks, like the
Saudis and various other countries to a certain extent,
who have been quite closely involved in the fighting
in Syria, are much more aware of the blowback
potential, as they call it. In Turkey, over the last few
months, there have been several arrests of people who
have been looking as though they are planning
terrorist attacks in Turkey, or even in Syria. But they
are terrorist attacks rather than fighting the rebel
cause.

I think it is rather interesting the way Turkish policy
is going. Turkey’s engagement in Syria, in the foreign

Ev 108 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

25 February 2014 Richard Barrett CMG OBE

fighters phenomenon, in regional security, in Iraq, and
with what is happening with Iran is absolutely
essential in my view, and therefore it worries one
when one sees Turkey veering off in one direction;
you think that is not terribly positive. At the moment
I would have thought maybe it is veering back into
more discussion with its partners and consideration
of the potential longer-term consequences of what is
happening in Syria.

Q718 Chair: So much of what we see as the ideas
behind al-Qaeda are developed on the internet through
social media. Do you think the companies are doing
enough to monitor what is being said when there are
people who are encouraging terrorist activities?
Richard Barrett: I agree: there is a lot of effort now
to have community reporting of inappropriate content,
is there not? I think that is quite a good way of dealing
with it. For the people who are setting up the
framework for postings and so on, to expect them to
censor it in some way is too much. I think there are
freedom of expression issues there that would be
much more important, personally.

Q719 Chair: Do you come across security services
in the States or anywhere else that are now more
proactive in trying to encourage the internet
companies to do more? I have been to Europol and
seen the monitoring that is going on at Europol of the
many hundreds of thousands of sites. There is a lot
out there, is there not? It is impossible for the
companies to look at everything.

Richard Barrett: I think there are two different
approaches. In one set of countries, you see them
trying to suppress it. They stop it. They close down
the sites and stuff like that. They try and build a
firewall, if you like, to protect their citizens. That does
not appear to work. That is not very good. On the
other side, right at the other end, there are people who
try to counter those videos and so on by addressing
the same audience or trying to reach the same
audience. Then, of course, you get into this issue of
whether it is working or not. What is the audience you
are addressing? There are many different audiences
you should be addressing with a counter-narrative.
Everybody is aware that, if you take the example of
Syria, many of the people who are going to Syria now
are doing so because of things they saw on YouTube
or whatever, so there is no doubt that it is a factor.

Q720 Dr Huppert:	I have seen YouTube’s

presentation on how they go about judging things, but
let me press you a bit further on this idea of showing
alternative messages, because that does seem like a
more positive approach. Do you think there are good
examples of where that has actually worked, so that
people find countervailing messages when they search
for things? Can it work?

Richard Barrett: Let us just look at counter-
messaging the audience that the terrorists are trying to
attract. There is lots of other counter-messaging that
we have to do, but if we just look at that end of it, I
think terrorists do seek this idea of legitimacy. If they
cannot express some sort of legitimacy for their
actions, then they are not going to get anybody to join
them at all. They have to say, “The enemy is really
bad. They are doing all these things. Our things, even
if they have bad consequences, are better, because at
least they address those terrible things that the enemy
is doing”. That legitimacy argument you can attack,
because you can say, “There is no way that by killing
women and children in the market or something you
are attacking the enemy, who you say is in
Washington. It is ridiculous,” and you undermine the
legitimacy. What that tends to do is make the terrorist
group shut out those voices, so it retreats into a
smaller area of the internet. If it retreats into a smaller
area of the internet, it reaches fewer people, so that is
not a bad result in some ways.

Q721 Chair: Thank you. I am afraid we must move
on. We could stay here all afternoon asking you
questions. Again, please would you pass on our thanks
to the Soufan Group for the work that they do?
Richard Barrett: I certainly will.

Q722 Chair: If there is anything that we have missed
out that you feel is relevant to our inquiry, please write
to us. We are in the final stages. The Committee is
going to Kenya next week to look at the after-effects
of Westgate, but we will be writing the report later on,
probably in March, and anything you have to say will
be very welcome. We are most grateful to you for
flying all the way from the United States.

Richard Barrett: It is a pleasure, Chairman. Thank
you.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 109

Tuesday 18 March 2014

Members present:

Keith Vaz (Chair)

Nicola Blackwood	Lorraine Fullbrook

Mr James Clappison	Dr Julian Huppert

Michael Ellis	Yasmin Qureshi

Paul Flynn	Mr David Winnick

Examination of Witness

Witness: Sir Mark Waller, Intelligence Services Commissioner, gave evidence.

Q723 Chair: Could I call the Committee to order and
could I ask Members present to declare any interests
they have that is over and above the Register of
Members Interests? I welcome our first witness for
today’s hearing. This is the continuation of our
hearings into counter-terrorism. I thank Sir Mark
Waller, the Intelligence Services Commissioner, for
coming before the Committee today.

Thank you, Sir Mark. We are most grateful to you for
coming here. Could I begin with a question about the
resourcing that you have in your post? You do 100
days a year.

Sir Mark Waller: 120 or 130 days a year.

Chair: 120 to 130 days a year.

Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Q724 Chair: You seem to have a staff of one
personal assistant. Do you think that is sufficient for
you, in this very important task of Intelligence
Services Commissioner, to be able to hold accountable
the intelligence services? It does not seem like you
are overburdened with having a lot of people to assist
you on this very difficult task.

Sir Mark Waller: The position is that at the moment
one person, Susan Carr, is effectively my PA. It is not
fair to suggest that is the only help I get because we
do have other help in relation to helping us draft and
type up reports and so on, but the whole strength of
the Commissioner system is that I do the work. The
whole point is that we do not have staff that is going
to go into the agencies. It is me. I am going to go in.
I am going to select the warrants that I am going to
concentrate on and read all the papers in relation to
those warrants so that I can be satisfied of the case of
necessity and proportionality. It is for me. That is the
importance of it.

Q725 Chair: The warrants are being granted and
authorised at the rate of eight per day, I think. In 2012
the figure was 2,838.

Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Q726 Chair: How many of those warrants and
authorisations have you personally seen, bearing in
mind that they are increasing at the rate of eight a
day?

Sir Mark Waller: I am afraid that figure last year is a
little bit misleading and the reason for this is that one
of the agencies changed its system and so there were
an awful lot of warrants cancelled and then warrants
obtained under the new system. If I were to give you

the figure for last year by reference to 2,830-odd, the
answer would be something in the region of 6%.

Q727 Chair: Right. Give us a figure now for 2013.
Not in a percentage total but in an absolute total,
numbers as opposed to percentage.

Sir Mark Waller: I can do it in a percentage first. Just
let us see whether I have that right. About 12%; so I
think about 1,700, or thereabouts, warrants and—
Chair: 1,000—

Sir Mark Waller: 1,600 or 1,700, something of that
nature. This is for last year, of course. The report you
are reading is the report for 2012. We are dealing with
last year’s, 2013, and—

Q728 Chair:	When you say the figures are

misleading, Sir Mark, these are your figures and they
are in your report. That is why you are before us
today, because we are questioning you on them. I
would not want you to start casting aspersions on your
own report.

Sir Mark Waller: They are absolutely accurate.

Q729 Chair: Are they accurate or not?

Sir Mark Waller: They are absolutely accurate.

Q730 Chair: They are not misleading.

Sir Mark Waller: That is a little unfair because they
are entirely accurate figures but, in terms of assessing
the percentage of warrants that I look at, it is a much
higher figure than would normally be there because of
what happened during the year.

Chair: It is now 1,700.

Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Q731 Chair: Of those 1,700, how many have you
had a look at to scrutinise?

Sir Mark Waller: About 200 or thereabouts.

Q732 Chair: Having looked at them, are you
satisfied that they were properly granted?

Sir Mark Waller: Absolutely, but remember I am not
just looking at the warrants themselves. What I am
looking at is the paperwork that leads up to the
warrants. In order to get a warrant there has to be a
submission prepared that has to make a case that it is
necessary to get the intelligence that the warrant is
designed to get and it has to make a case that privacy
has only been intruded to the most limited extent and
that, such intrusion into privacy as there is, it is
justified by the requirement to get that form of

Ev 110 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 Sir Mark Waller

intelligence. I am looking at the paperwork as much
as anything.

Q733 Chair: In respect of the Snowden issue, you
made a comment in your report. You said, “I have
discussed matters fully with senior officials within
GCHQ and I am satisfied that they are not
circumventing the legal framework under which they
operate.” Is that the way in which you satisfied
yourself that there were no problems with what
Snowden had said, by having a discussion?

Sir Mark Waller: The paragraph before I say that
showed that we were right at the moment at which we
were going to be publishing the report and Snowden
happened. I just thought it was absolutely wrong to
publish my report without going down to GCHQ in
order to see whether there was anything in the
allegation that was being made. The allegation that
was being made at that time was that GCHQ were
taking no notice of UK law. They were doing it all
through America and they were behaving unlawfully.

Q734 Chair: You went down to GCHQ.

Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Q735 Chair: You went to see who there?

Sir Mark Waller: I saw the second head of the agency,
in fact.

Q736 Chair: How did you satisfy yourself? It seems,
from your comment, that what you did was you had a
discussion with them, you heard what they had to say
and you have accepted what they had to say.

Sir Mark Waller: Certainly.

Chair: Is that it?

Sir Mark Waller: Certainly.

Chair: Just a discussion?

Sir Mark Waller: Certainly.

Chair: Nothing else?

Sir Mark Waller: Certainly.

Q737 Chair: That is the way you were satisfied that
there was no circumventing on UK law. You went to
see them. You sat round a table. You had a
discussion—

Sir Mark Waller: You have to remember that I had
done a year and a half’s inspection. I have a very good
idea as to what the ethos of this agency is.

Chair: Of course.

Sir Mark Waller: They know perfectly well that they
have to make out their case and the legality of their
cases and so on and I have absolutely, clearly,
accepted that—

Q738 Chair: Of course. How many times have you
visited GCHQ in the three years and two months that
you have been the Commissioner?

Sir Mark Waller: Three years and two months. Well,
again, each visit in 2012 is in the report. Effectively,
I do two inspections a year.

Q739 Chair: So you have been about six times?

Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Q740 Chair: Six times in three years?

Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Q741 Chair: That satisfies you that everything is in
order. I am not saying this is my view, but some may
feel that this is not particularly robust in terms of
holding the security services to account.

Sir Mark Waller: Can I say that when I started the
job I had a scepticism about the agencies and I did
wonder whether two visits a year and “dip-sampling”
was sufficient, but when you get down there and you
see the care with which they prepare their submissions
and the cases that they make on the submissions you
suddenly also realise that these people do not want to
break the law. Individuals do not want to be liable for
criminal offences. You also suddenly appreciate that—

Q742 Chair:	This is done on the basis of

conversations?

Sir Mark Waller: No. It is done on the basis of
reading their reports and asking them questions about
it. I have visited certain stations as well abroad and I
have my conversations there as well. The important
thing is that you suddenly realise that each person who
is filling in the case has in the back of their mind that
there is a chance—and it is quite a good chance—that
some senior judge is going to read these papers and
hold them to account.

Chair: Indeed. That is extremely helpful.

Q743 Mr Winnick: Sir Mark, when these stories
appeared arising from Snowden regarding GCHQ,
presumably you did not work on the basis that, when
you had a conversation, as you explained to the Chair,
the Director-General of GCHQ would have said,
“We’ve broken the law”, or, “The Snowden
accusations are correct”. Presumably you expected the
reaction that the chief executive gave.

Sir Mark Waller: If you want to know, I was
absolutely terrified that all that I had thought for 18
months was now going to turn out to be utterly untrue;
in other words, that I had been spoofed. That is what
I was worried about. Do not think it was just a
conversation across the table, “Oh, I am sure it is all
right, isn’t it?” That is not the conversation I had. The
conversation I had was, “Look, you show me how and
why you are doing it because this is a very serious
allegation”.

Mr Winnick: Indeed.

Sir Mark Waller: They gave me the details of what
they do and how they do it. They gave me those
details.

Q744 Mr Winnick: This is a very important point
because the accusation is that probing and
investigation has not taken place. When you say you
had a conversation and the chief executive confirmed
all was in order, some may say, cynically and perhaps
without justification, “Well, this is the old boys’
network”. You had to be satisfied. The Director-
General said what you expected him to say, but at the
end of it all—am I not right—there was no probing
into what he said to you. There was no investigation.
You accepted his word, that he was telling truth, as
well he might, but what disturbs some of us, among
those of us who have taken the Snowden report rather

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 111

18 March 2014 Sir Mark Waller

seriously, is that there is not enough investigation or
any investigation to find out what happened.

Sir Mark Waller: As I knew—I am sorry. I did not
mean to interrupt. I apologise.

Chair: No, I think Mr Winnick had come to the end.
Sir Mark Waller: I am so sorry. As the paragraph in
the report says, I knew at that moment in time that the
ISC Committee was going to be conducting its own
investigations. That is what the paragraph says. I
knew that further investigation was taking place. I
wanted to go down and check whether I had been
spoofed for 18 months in thinking these people were
doing things lawfully. That is what I wanted to check.
Chair: Thank you, very helpful.

Q745 Dr Huppert: I am afraid I am going to have
leave after this for another committee. You will
obviously be familiar with section 94 of the
Telecommunications Act 1984, which gives very
broad powers in the interests of national security to
do essentially anything. What role do you play in
supervising how it is used, monitoring the use and
checking that it is all proportionate?

Sir Mark Waller: That is just simply not part of my
statutory oversight. I have heard that you are
concerned about this. As you know, the new
legislation allows me to take up with the Prime
Minister whether there are things that I or somebody
else should have oversight of. It seems to me that that
is an example of where it would be right to have a
word with the Prime Minister.

Q746 Dr Huppert: I would be interested to know if
you think anybody looks at how it is used, but I am
also surprised because	your own	website,

intelligencecommissioners.com, says, “Sir Mark
Waller is charged with overseeing the broader conduct
of the intelligence services in relation to the discharge
of their functions.” Yet you are saying that, despite
the fact this is part of their functions, you do not have
any responsibility for it.

Sir Mark Waller: No, I do not have an oversight.

Dr Huppert: Do you know who does?

Sir Mark Waller: There is no statutory oversight of
that section.

Q747 Michael Ellis: Sir Mark, when you check
things for the intelligence and security services, how
often are they not in order? You have talked about a
6% or a 12% dip sample; a couple of hundred that
you randomly, I presume, pick out from the 1,700 or
so warrants that are issued. How many have you
found that are not in order?

Sir Mark Waller: I have found one, which I think is
in that report last year, where there had been a taking
of a template of the warrant and the wrong description
was in the warrant, but I have never found any
instance in which there was some failure to get the
thing right.

Q748 Michael Ellis: That single error was a
typographical or clerical error as opposed to an error
of process?

Sir Mark Waller: Yes, that is true, but it is not quite
typographical. Typographical errors do also happen

and I do sometimes find those, but if it is clear on the
face of the document that it is typographical you can
correct that and there is no trouble. Obviously they
have to report errors to me and there are errors
reported. Those, again, are administrative errors, i.e.
circumstances in which somebody has failed to renew
something, and so there is a period of 24 hours, or
whatever it may be, where intelligence is being
wrongfully gathered.

Q749 Michael Ellis: Do you have a process by
which you can look at particular warrants or particular
files because they relate to prominent people, for
example, or people over whom you have a particular
interest? Do you have a way of sifting through those
that you might particularly want to look at or is this a
completely random process?

Sir Mark Waller: No. They give me a full list that
will have a little description of what it is concerned
with. I can certainly pick out warrants if they have a
particular feature or a particular person or, in some
instances, a particular country, if it is the Foreign
Secretary; those sorts of warrants.

Q750 Michael Ellis: Very well. This is a key
question, if I may. How do you know that you are
seeing all 1,700 that the security services have
prepared? For example, how do you know that there
are not a handful that you have not seen that are not
listed on this full list? How do you know?

Sir Mark Waller: That is a thing that I debate with
them almost each time.

Q751 Michael Ellis: You do?

Sir Mark Waller: Trying to prove—

Q752 Michael Ellis: What is their answer?

Sir Mark Waller: I will tell you what I say to them.
I say, “Look, just assume for the moment that I am
somebody who does not believe a word that you are
saying and I think you have a room at the back there
and that you are doing all sorts of things that you
should not be doing but you are not showing me. How
do you prove that is not so?” They say to me, “Look,
nobody can do anything in this organisation without
somebody else knowing”. The paperwork will go, say,
from a foreign station somewhere up through the
senior people there. It goes through up to the head
office and so on. If this room existed where everybody
is doing it, it would have to be a massive conspiracy.
That is my judgment.

Q753 Michael Ellis: It is just that we hear reports
about mass shredding in the Metropolitan Police. We
hear reports about things going missing and we hear
about potential miscarriages of justice. For those of us
that support the work of the security services, we want
to be assured that people like you are not being in any
way hampered in the work that you are doing and that
you are seeing everything you are entitled to see. Are
you satisfied, so that you feel sure, that you are seeing
that material?

Sir Mark Waller: I am satisfied so that I feel sure and
that is why, after the Snowden allegations, I went

Ev 112 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 Sir Mark Waller

haring down, because I suddenly thought, “Crikey”,
but I became sure again.

Q754 Yasmin Qureshi: In the year 2012 there were
2,838 warrants and authorisations approved. How
many did you actually look at yourself?

Sir Mark Waller: I think I have already answered this
question. This is exactly what the Chairman asked me,
but I will answer it again. I gave it in percentage
terms. It is about 6%.

Q755 Yasmin Qureshi: That is right, 6%, but do you
not think that if you looked at each one of those cases
that would be better reassurance to the public that,
in each case, there has been an appropriate level of
information provided and the decision to do it has
been appropriate? Do you think 6% is far too small
a sample?

Sir Mark Waller: As I said, when I started out I was
sceptical and I worried that it was too small a sample.
Now, because I see the way they operate, I do not
think it is and the reason I don’t think it is is because
each and every person that writes the submission
showing it is necessary to do what they want to do,
showing that privacy has been properly considered,
has in their mind that this may be read by a judge.

Q756 Paul Flynn: You are opposed to the suggestion
that an inspector general should be appointed to
oversee all aspects of the intelligence services. Why?
Sir Mark Waller: It would certainly depend on
precisely what you had in mind by an inspector
general. If it was simply to say we will have one
person doing the job that is Sir Anthony May and I
do, I do not see the point of that because you have
two judges doing the work. Therefore, it would seem
to me, if it just going to be one, combining them. If
you are going to say, “Well, no, it is not that; I want
somebody who is not a judge to have a big
organisation with lots of people who are going to go
into the agencies and do everything”, first you have to
find the right people.

Secondly, you may be doing something that has lost
one of the key features of the way it operates now,
i.e. you no longer have the agencies saying, “Oh my
goodness me, a senior judge may read this”. I think
you will lose something and I query whether you gain
anything. The bureaucracy that would be built up and
the amount of time that you would take with the
agencies when they are meant to be doing a job, which
is protecting the country, I query: is that a gain? I
doubt it.

Q757 Paul Flynn: The role of MPs includes the
solemn duty now of declaring war and deciding when
we join conflicts. The result of our recent decisions
has been the loss of 628 British lives. In 2003 we
were misinformed by the security services and the ISC
on the weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. In 2006
we were also misinformed on the likelihood that there
would be no shots fired in the Helmand Province. Two
members of the Committee were told directly that
Britain was not involved with the rendition of
prisoners and we know now that this was a lie and we
were, as a nation, complicit with torture by Gaddafi,

among others. Don’t you think, in those
circumstances, when there has been a history of
misinformation supplied to MPs, we need to change
the system and put someone else in charge?

Sir Mark Waller: What you are talking about occurred
in the early 2000s.

Paul Flynn: The extraordinary rendition was more
recent than that.

Sir Mark Waller: 2002.

Chair: If you could address the general point rather
than specific “when did the war start” issue.

Sir Mark Waller: I can’t say any more. I do not
believe that putting in place an inspector general with
a lot of bureaucracy and taking up—remember,
resources are finite. You take up a lot of time at the
agencies when they are trying to do the things that
they want to do. I just do not believe—

Q758 Paul Flynn: You seem to be supportive of the
recent history and I am telling you, as a Member of
Parliament, that I and all other Members of Parliament
were misinformed or lied to on these most important
matters and we took those decisions to send young
men and women to their deaths on the basis of
misinformation, mistakes or actual lies. In those
circumstances, how can you feel so complacent about
the status quo?

Sir Mark Waller: I think it is very unfair to say that I
am complacent. I certainly am not complacent. I go
in with a complete lack of complacency. I go in and
examine as hard as I can. I am very doubtful whether
some of what you are saying would be caught even
by a large inspector bureaucracy and I am not
complacent. I just worry that you will lose something
by having a more bureaucratic inspector. That is all I
am worried about.

Q759 Paul Flynn:	The Intelligence Security

Committee is nominated by the Prime Minister and it
is a creature of Government and it had a record of
being complicit with Government decisions. Surely
there is a better way and the Members of Parliament
need someone to represent their interests and the
interests of the country generally, rather than being an
arm of Government and a poodle committee that does
what Government tells them to do.

Sir Mark Waller: I do not think the ISC now just is a
poodle. The ISC is now a parliamentary committee.
You could criticise the system previously on the basis
it was just a Prime Minister-appointed body, but it is
now a parliamentary committee and it does a great
deal in terms of investigation and so on.

Chair: Mr Flynn does not mean to cast aspersions on
those who sit on the Committee, but I think the point
he is making is that it is not elected by the House. It
is appointed by the Prime Minister.

Q760 Paul Flynn: Who do you think should inform
MPs before we take these decisions? When we have
a debate on a possible crisis at the moment, when it
is not impossible that we might be called on to take
military action, who do we believe?

Chair: This may be slightly beyond your remit, but it
is very helpful for Mr Flynn to ask.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 113

18 March 2014 Sir Mark Waller

Sir Mark Waller: I am afraid it is. Don’t worry, I can
understand. I am not not understanding. I just do not
think I can help.

Chair: Thank you. That is very helpful and we accept
that answer.

Q761 Nicola Blackwood: I want to move on to your
powers to interrogate the behaviour of individuals. I
understand from the notes that you provided that one
of your statutory functions is keeping under review
the exercise and performance of members of the
intelligence service and others in relation to their
powers and duties under parts 2 and 3 of RIPA. I want
to ask specifically, who examines the disciplinary
proceedings against the employees of the security
intelligences agencies?

Sir Mark Waller: I do not think that is within my
statutory remit, but I certainly am interested. They
have a very powerful auditing process. First of all,
obviously their software will show any misuse by
anybody of the people trying to get hold of telephone
numbers or whatever it may be. That would be flagged
up. They have a very strong disciplinary process and
I see that process and the way it has been carried out.

Q762 Nicola Blackwood: How do you see that
process?

Sir Mark Waller: They report to me. They are
prepared to show me a report.

Q763 Nicola Blackwood: You are presented with a
report on your twice-yearly visits of all disciplinary
proceedings?

Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Q764 Nicola Blackwood: Do you take any further
action to investigate whether those disciplinary
proceedings have been appropriately managed and
taken forward?

Sir Mark Waller: I am able to see what it was that the
person was being disciplined for, if they were being
disciplined. To that extent the answer is yes.

Q765 Nicola Blackwood: No. You can see what it
was, but I am asking whether you interrogate further
to test whether the disciplinary proceedings have all
been conducted according to an appropriate standard.
Sir Mark Waller: I see their rules. I don’t say that I
challenge, “Gosh, did you comply with the rules”. I
don’t say that.

Q766 Nicola Blackwood: You don’t do that?

Sir Mark Waller: No.

Q767 Nicola Blackwood: If that is not your job, is
that the job of anybody else?

Sir Mark Waller: No.

Q768 Nicola Blackwood: All right. Okay, that is
fine. Secondly, I just want to come back to a couple
of comments you have made about the fact that you
have confidence that the staff you have met are
conscientious and professional and want to do the
right thing. How would you characterise your

relationship with the security intelligence services that
you are there to hold to account?

Sir Mark Waller: I think they are respectful of the
fact that a judge or, I am afraid to say, ex-judge is
prepared to do this job and, for the senior members of
the organisation whom I see each time, obviously I
get to know them quite well. I do, but the individuals
who come and have to defend the cases they have
made or for me to ask questions about, I think they
think they are being subjected to quite serious
examination by a judge.

Q769 Nicola Blackwood: You think you have
sufficient authority within the framework that you
have been describing to us, of twice-yearly meetings
and quite small samples, to be able to demonstrate
a significant amount of accountability for what is a
widespread secret organisation.

Sir Mark Waller: Yes, I think so, but that is because I
do believe that—I am repeating myself—each person
within the organisation who has to prepare these
submissions and the case to get the warrant or the
authorisation does so knowing perfectly well that
there is a chance that a judge will look at it. I have
never found one that is—

Chair: Very helpful. I am most grateful.

Sir Mark Waller: Thank you.

Q770 Mr Clappison: Sir Mark, I think we should be
properly grateful to you for the work that you do and
I certainly would join with you in the importance that
you attach to the work that the security services
undoubtedly do in protecting the public, but I think
you will also understand the concerns Members of
Parliament have and should have when it is clear that
something has gone wrong in the not-to-distant past.
You have spoken today of what I think we could
describe as the ethos of the organisation that you dealt
with and the conscientiousness of the people in it and
the concerns they have. I think we could characterise
that as an ethos. Can you understand the concerns that
people might have, though, when, in the same
organisation and presumably with the same ethos, in
the not-to-distant past something went seriously
wrong and there was some complicity of this country
in a case where torture was involved? Yes, I am asking
about the Binyam Mohamed case.

Sir Mark Waller: Of course I understand that. All one
can say in relation to that is that it is an extra statutory
oversight that relates to the consolidated guidance.

Q771 Mr Clappison: I want to come on to ask you
about those because they are concerned with perhaps
a slightly different side of things, as you have said.
They come into play when a member of the
intelligence services has been involved in the
interviewing of a detainee held oversees by a third
party. Also, where they have received information
from a liaison service or they have passed information
on to a liaison service when they are liaising with a
third party. How many of those cases have you dealt
with that fall under the consolidated guidelines
relating to those cases where somebody is held
overseas by a third party or information has been
received from a liaison service or our services have

Ev 114 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 Sir Mark Waller

passed information on to a liaison service, which I
take it has been the liaison service being some other
country’s service?

Sir Mark Waller: Again, because I was concerned
about the breadth of this oversight and I could not
possibly look at each and every case, the way I have
organised it is that each of the agencies prepares a full
grid of the cases in which the consolidated guidance
applies. That is to say, each and every case where
there is a detainee involved and where somebody has
had to do an assessment of whether there is a serious
risk of cruel or inhumane treatment. I get that full grid
and I see exactly what they did. What the consolidated
guidance is seeking to achieve, first of all, is that
anybody who is concerned either for questioning or
sharing of intelligence where there may be a detention
has at the forefront of their mind that they must ask
themselves the question, “Is there a risk of cruel or
inhumane treatment?” If there is a serious risk, then
they must go through the process. First, referring it up
to a senior person in the organisation. If ultimately
there is still an assessment that there is a serious risk
then it must go up to a Minister.

Q772 Mr Clappison: I am grateful to you for that
answer. Can you tell us, first, how many such cases
fall within the consolidated guidelines? Not how many
you have looked at, but how many cases there are.

Sir Mark Waller: Hundreds.

Q773 Mr Clappison: Hundreds. Are they included
in the figure of 2,800?

Sir Mark Waller: No.

Q774 Mr Clappison: That is a different figure?

Sir Mark Waller: Absolutely, yes. I am sorry. It is
hundreds. It happens on a daily basis.

Q775 Mr Clappison: You look into a sample of
those cases?

Sir Mark Waller: Exactly that.

Q776 Mr Clappison: Could you give us an idea of
the percentage that you look at?

Sir Mark Waller: I am afraid I can’t. Do you want
me to—

Q777 Mr Clappison: That is okay. If you feel like
writing afterwards that would be very helpful. I am
sure members of the Committee would find that
helpful.

When you are looking at these cases you are looking
at reports that have been given to you, what has been
written up about them. Is that right?

Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Q778 Mr Clappison: You are looking at the cases.
You are looking at the cases and you are looking at
the paperwork that has come out of the cases. Yes?
Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Q779 Mr Clappison: When you say you are looking
at them, exactly what do you do?

Sir Mark Waller: What I am trying to do is to check
that these grids are accurate; that is to say, that the

employees in the agencies have at the forefront of
their minds the consolidated guidance and the tests
and that when they go across the page saying that,
yes, they took the view that there was a serious risk
but then, “Who did you refer it to?” The answer was,
“Senior person”, and then it might have been referred
to a Minister. What I am checking is to see that the
papers I have show that that is the process through
which they went. It is very important to know that I
am not checking whether there was a serious risk. I
am checking that they always think about it and then
take the process through.

Q780 Mr Clappison: Obviously you are looking at
this seriously within the powers that you have been
given, but what you are describing to us is a paper
compliance exercise, is it not?

Sir Mark Waller: It is. I think that is a fair way of
putting it, but I do not think it is just a paper
compliance exercise because what it is doing is
making sure that all the individuals who have
anything to do with a detainee register that the
consolidated guidance—and I see that. I have
paperwork that shows me that.

Q781 Mr Clappison: Do you ever get the chance to
meet the people who have been preparing these
reports and ask them questions?

Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Mr Clappison: You do.

Sir Mark Waller: Yes.

Q782 Mr Clappison: In how many cases does that
happen?

Sir Mark Waller: It happens more when I am visiting
a station because that is where it happens more than
anywhere else that they have to consider whether, for
example, they are going to share intelligence with a
liaison where there is a risk of serious—

Q783 Mr Clappison: Could I just ask you one other
question arising from that. I am very grateful to you
for your answers. On the basis of what you have told
us, would you be confident that a case like that of
Binyam Mohamed could not happen now?

Sir Mark Waller: I do think I would because I do
think it is now absolutely ingrained in the people who
work for either SIS or the security service, but
particularly SIS, that if there is a detainee involved
they must apply the consolidated guidance.

Chair: Thank you very much. Colleagues, we have
other witnesses.

Q784 Nicola Blackwood: Sir Mark, you described
your anxiety when the Snowden revelations hit and
you rushing off to GCHQ in order to check that what
you thought you knew about them was true. You can
imagine that all the constituents that we have, the
general public, feel the same level of anxiety, but even
more because they do not know the people you are
talking to and we do not know them. On top of that,
we have had the same about policing, with
Hillsborough and with the Ellison Report, and so there
is this huge crisis of confidence in policing and
undercover operations. Do you think that the outline

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 115

18 March 2014 Sir Mark Waller

of the oversight that you have given us today would
reassure those constituents that there is sufficient
accountability in the system when added together with
the ISC? Do you think there are sufficient powers in
the system to hold those individuals to account to give
confidence back to the public?

Sir Mark Waller: I do think so, but I do think there
is a major worry as to whether the public appreciate,
for example, what Sir Anthony May and I do. I am
afraid I have found, in talking to members of the
public, that they did not know we existed.

Chair: That is why the Committee has brought you
hear, so that people do know that you exist.

Sir Mark Waller: Touché, Chairman.

Q785 Nicola Blackwood: How many disciplinary
proceedings were reported to you in 2013?

Chair: How many disciplinary proceedings in 2013?
Sir Mark Waller: I don’t know.

Nicola Blackwood:	You said that disciplinary

proceedings were reported to you and I am just
wondering—

Chair: Would you write to the Committee and tell us?
Sir Mark Waller: I will try and do that.

Nicola Blackwood: Thank you.

Q786 Mr Winnick: The follow-up questions are
regarding the position of the security service and let
me say straight away, Sir Mark, that I share the views
of all colleagues, as yourself, of the essential work
undertaken by the security services; even more so, of
course, as a result of the constant threat of terrorism.
Your former judicial colleague, Lord Neuberger, in the
case that Mr Clappison mentioned—and I am sure you
are perfectly aware of—made his judgment in
February 2010. He said, “Some security officials
appear to have a dubious record when it comes to
human rights and coercive techniques.” That is a
pretty damning indictment.

Sir Mark Waller: I think he said the evidence in the
case indicated that. I was perfectly well aware that
you were going to put that passage to me because you
put it to Sir Anthony and to others, I think. I think it
is slightly taken out of context, but don’t worry about
that point. The real point is that the question of
whether there was misconduct was never tried out. It
is true that he made that comment there and you will
remember that what happened was that the Crown
asked him to remove that passage from his judgment.
Mr Winnick: Exactly.

Sir Mark Waller: He was then persuaded to put it
back in. Part of the case of the Crown for asking him
to remove it was that it has simply never been tried
out as to whether there was this misconduct, but the
other important point is that he is talking about
something that happened in the early 2000s. It was the
forebear to the consolidated guidance that has now
been brought in, in order to try and see that people
are absolutely conscious of what their duties are.

Q787 Mr Winnick: Surely Lord Neuberger—a
distinguished judge, indeed like yourself, and in the
past he was Master of the Rolls—would not have
dreamt of making the comment that I have quoted

unless he was pretty certain he was on good grounds
for doing so and the fact—

Sir Mark Waller: No, I am sorry, just pause a second.
Mr Winnick: Yes, of course.

Sir Mark Waller: Remember, it is at an interlocutory
stage. Everything is on paper. So he is saying, “I think
that what is in the documents here indicates that”, but
what he could no say and part of the argument of the
Crown was he cannot say it is proved because nobody
has tried it out. One of the things that happened was
that, because the Crown were not able to produce the
secret evidence in order to defend themselves against
the case, ultimately—

Q788 Mr Winnick: Does that mean you take the
view that at no stage in recent times—and no one has
suggested for one moment that they were directly
involved in torture, not a single person to my
knowledge, prisoner or otherwise has suggested that—
that no security official was complicit in the torture
carried out abroad? Are you saying that?

Sir Mark Waller: I do not know what happened in
2000. I have no idea. If there was, it was
reprehensible.

Mr Winnick: To say the least.

Sir Mark Waller: Of course.

Mr Winnick: Because the Government kept on
saying, as the present Government has done, that
Britain rules out torture completely, directly or
indirectly.

Chair: If we could return to how your role impacts on
this. Would you like to say something finally on this?
Sir Mark Waller: The way that the consolidated
guidance has been implemented—and I have seen it
implemented across the board—shows now, as it
seems to me, that it is absolutely ingrained in those
people who are working for SIS or the security.

Q789 Chair: Thank you, very helpful. Sir Mark, the
concerns of this Committee are not that you are not a
very distinguished, decent man, which clearly you are,
and you are obviously doing this job to the best of
your ability, but the problem is that perhaps you are
not as resourced as you should be. An Intelligence
Services Commissioner, dealing with some of the
most important issues cannot feel that they have a grip
of this with just one personal assistant as their staff.
We take the point that nobody wants a bureaucratic
system, but don’t you think there is a case for
increasing the staffing of the Intelligence Services
Commissioner or even making it into a full-time
position, which clearly it is not at the moment?

Sir Mark Waller: I hear what you say. I think we are
getting more people, but the important thing is that—

Q790 Chair: But do you think it should not be a full-
time post, given what we have read in the newspapers,
given what Snowden has said, given the concerns of
the public and Parliament?

Sir Mark Waller: By full-time, do you mean that you
ask a retired judge to do it full-time or are you saying
we make one of our judges do it full-time?

Chair: No, I am not saying any judge of any
particularly employment. I am just talking about a

Ev 116 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 Sir Mark Waller

full-time post. This is not a full-time post at the
moment.

Sir Mark Waller: No, it is not a full-time post.
Chair: It is a part-time post and, given what you have
seen and given the volume of the work and given the
public concern, some of it may be able to be addressed
if it was a full-time post.

Sir Mark Waller: All I can say is that I think having
a senior judge prepared to do what Sir Anthony May
and I do produces a situation at the agencies that
means they get the thing right.

Q791 Chair: Do you not feel you should have more
powers to deal with your subject matter? Obviously
we have great respect for the security services, but
sometimes they have to be involved in activities to
defend the liberty of our country that you and I would
normally not want to know about. You are hardly a
candidate for the House of Cards. You are a former
judge and you are dealing with people who have to
deal with very difficult areas. Do you not think you
need to be given more powers to deal with these
issues?

Sir Mark Waller: I don’t think so. If I were to find
that they had not made out a case that would mean
that people have been acting unlawfully. If I thought
people had been acting unlawfully then I would have
to report them to the police. That would be as simple
as that.

Chair: But you have never had to do this.

Sir Mark Waller: I have not. If I thought that they
were conducting surveillance that they should not
have been conducting over some individual then it
seems to me that I would have to inform that
individual so that they could bring that case before the
IPT. I just fear that if you expand and expand and
expand you will find that you do not get the benefit
because agencies will be spending so much time on
dealing with inspectors—

Chair: Indeed, you have made that clear.

Sir Mark Waller: That is my view. I might not have
had that view before I started and I wish one could
make the problem go away.

Chair:Yes, indeed. That is very helpful. Thank you
for coming here today. I think you have done a great
service to the role of Intelligence Services
Commissioner for coming before the House and being
able to questions. I know that you and your wife have
set up a Charlie Waller Memorial Trust. We wish you
the best with that trust and the aims of that trust and
the work that you all do. We know that is very close
to your heart and we wish it success for the future.
Sir Mark Waller: Thank you very much, Chairman.
It is very kind of you to say that.

Chair: Thank you, Sir Mark.

Sir Mark Waller: Thank you all.

Examination of Witnesses

Witnesses: Rt Hon David Davis MP, and Nick Pickles, Big Brother Watch, gave evidence.

Q792 Chair: It is very unusual for this Committee to
have Members of Parliament before it. The reason we
have asked you to appear before us today is because
of your knowledge about these issues. Mr Pickles,
thank you very much for coming. I am sorry we are
running a little late. You will appreciate the fact that
members of this Committee will ask robust, quick,
sharp questions and we will get quick, sharp replies,
which you are very used to, Mr Davis.

Could I start with you, Mr Davis, and the publication
of the Snowden files and generally the architecture of
scrutiny. Do you think that what we have at the
moment is enough as far as the ISC is concerned, the
Commissioners—you have just heard from one of
them—or do you think you should toughen it up and
make it different?

Mr Davis: No, Mr Chairman. Much of my evidence
today is based on a visit to the United States to look
at the impact of the Snowden files there. I should say,
as a declaration of interest, that trip was paid for by
Big Brother Watch, by the way, if you can register
that. The arrangements there, although they are
criticised in the States for being insufficiently robust,
are 1,000 times more robust than ours are already.
There is much more public information available,
qualitatively different levels of public information.
There is more rigorous oversight by many more
organisations than you have heard about here. There
are legal protections for the privacy of citizens that do
not exist here. There is a constitutional bar on general

warrants, which we do not have here. There are proper
separations of powers, so the legislators actively
challenge the Executive in the interpretation of the
law; something very important on the torture issues as
well other issues. Of course, something that we cannot
reproduce, they have a far stronger IT industry than
we have here who have strong vested interests in
making sure that surveillance is not misused.

Q793 Chair: Your top three changes to what we have
at the moment, including parliamentary scrutiny,
would be what?

Mr Davis: Significant beefing up of the ISC, including
its method of appointment—

Q794 Chair: You favour election by the House.

Mr Davis: I am in favour of election by the House. I
do not mind the Prime Minister having a say at the
nomination stage. For example, if I were a well-
known communist spy I could be knocked out at the
beginning. I do not mind that, but I think the House
should choose. I agree with the notion put forward by
the Shadow Home Secretary that the chairman of it
should be a Member of the Opposition, as with the
Public Accounts Committee. Indeed, I think the Public
Accounts Committee has a lot to offer here.
Something else that was said to me by a member of
the President’s Panel was one of the great virtues of
the American system is that there is more than one
oversight committee. There are two oversight

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 117

18 March 2014 Rt Hon David Davis MP and Nick Pickles

committees in the House and Senate, but you also
have the judiciary committee with an insight to it. It
was a judiciary committee in the latest scandal that
provided the most important piece of evidence,
namely that the so-called 54 cases stopped by the
surveillance or claimed to be stopped by surveillance
were untrue. There were zero cases stopped by
surveillance.

Q795 Chair: Mr Pickles, top three changes?

Nick Pickles: I agree with the President’s review. I
think the first one is that you end bulk collection. You
go back to a system where warrants are targeted on
individuals and on premises and you do not collect
information in bulk. The two things that became clear
from the US trip is there are different kinds of bulk
collection. There is bulk collection without the
consent of companies and there is bulk collection by
ordering companies to hand information over. Late
last night I received a letter from British Telecom
refusing to deny that they are handing over
information in bulk on thousands or millions of
British citizens and that mirrors a refusal to deny the
same situation in a parliamentary answer received by
Mr Davis.

I think ending bulk collection, and then introducing
judicial authorisation for warrants, particularly on
interception, so we do not have the situation we have
just seen with retrospective authorisation by a retired
judge. You have an actual judge hearing both sides
evidence. Again, the President’s review made clear the
danger of one-sided courts. Then, finally, I
wholeheartedly agree, rigorous oversight outside the
agencies that must include parliamentary oversight.
One of the nuance changes that struck me was the
remark by the staffers, from the members of the
Senate Intelligence Committee, who said the
difference it makes by individual members of a
committee being able to hire then own member of
staff who has security clearance, rather than relying
on a collective clerking staff provided by the agencies.

Q796 Chair: Mr Davis, were you glad when the
Guardian published the Snowden revelations?

Mr Davis: I think the Guardian did a public service
by publishing the Snowden revelations and indeed,
bluntly, I think the Government was heavy-handed in
dealing with him. If you look at every other country
in the world, the newspapers that have brought this to
the fore have been feted. They have been up for
Pulitzer Prizes. They have been seen, not just by their
colleagues but by the public and by the Governments
involved, as having done a service. This is the only
country in the world where the Government has taken
the opposite view.

Q797 Chair: Mr Pickles, was it a public service to
possibly put members of our security service at risk
as a result of what happened?

Nick Pickles: I think we need to qualify that, but this
was absolutely in the public interest if you look at the
remarks of Sir Tim Berners-Lee through to the former
Vice President of the United States saying this
exposed crimes against the constitution. Only this
week we had former members of the Church

Committee saying that we need a Church Committee
for the 21st century. It is absolutely in the public
interest.

Mr Davis: Can I say as well, Mr Chairman, I do not
believe that the Guardian's publication has put
anybody at risk. You have had Mr Rusbridger in front
of you. I have spoken to him at great length as well
on this subject and they had been extremely careful to
talk to the Government with one exception, which I
think was the G-20 exposure that did not put anybody
at risk except for a certain amount of embarrassment.
With one exception, that being that one, they spoke to
the Government before every single article was
published. I do not think the idea that they put people
at risk stands up at all.

Chair: Thank you.

Q798 Mr Clappison: Mr Pickles, in view of the
evidence we have just heard, could you tell us how
bulk collection fits into the picture of warrants?

Nick Pickles: The one word you did not hear was
“certificates”. There are warrants and then there are
certificates. Section 8(1) of RIPA allow for warrants
and that is for communications within the UK, the
internal communications. Section 8(4) of RIPA
discusses external communications and they are
deemed to have a lower legal protection and this is
based on a model where information would flow out
and into the UK over copper telephone wires to the
Soviet Bloc and so you would intercept every call that
was leaving to go to that country. The problem is if
you apply that model to the internet. You could send
a text message or a Facebook message to some
standing a few feet away from you and it might exit
and re-enter the UK and, therefore, falls under this
definition of external communications. I think section
8(4) of RIPA are particularly—

Mr Davis: Also section 94.

Nick Pickles: Then we have section 94 of the
Telecommunications Act, which I mentioned and Dr
Huppert mentioned earlier.

Q799 Mr Clappison: Two quick questions. First of
all, it is bulk collection of what and who is
supervising it?

Nick Pickles: My letter to BT was asking, “Do you
hand over data in bulk under any authority?”

Q800 Mr Clappison: What is the data that is being
handed over?

Nick Pickles:	That would be metadata; the

communications data; the who, what, where and
when. That would be for a traditional landline or on
the internet it could be email addresses—

Mr Clappison: Or a mobile.

Nick Pickles: Or mobile phones, depending on the
operators. My concerns is that there is the activity
going on under the Telecommunications Act that is
unsupervised and that is why BT cannot publicly
refuse that they are handing over information in bulk.

Q801 Mr Clappison: I should ask also, who is it
being handed over to?

Nick Pickles: This is the question. We simply do not
know. Questions in the House have been met with

Ev 118 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 Rt Hon David Davis MP and Nick Pickles

the usual response and everybody has refused to talk
about it.

Mr Clappison: I suppose if we do not know who it
is being handed over to we can’t ask who is
scrutinising it.

Mr Davis: The answer to my question was provided
by Mr Brokenshire, so you may have an opportunity.
Is he not appearing before you today?

Chair: Yes, thank you.

Q802 Dr Huppert: Could I just pick up this thing
you said, Mr Pickles, about BT being unable to deny
various things? Can you just amplify a bit on that and
perhaps built on Mr Clappison’s questions as well?
What exactly could they not deny? Presumably, if they
didn’t have any orders under section 94 of the
Telecommunications Act they could say that they had
none. It just bans them from saying so if they do have
any. Do you have any sense as to whether this is a
widespread thing? Is this a BT-only thing? I would be
very interested to hear what you have discovered
about all of this.

Nick Pickles: My interest comes from the trip to the
US where it became clear—and this was one of the
first Snowden revelations in	America—that

particularly the Verizon Business Services were
receiving orders under section 215 of the Patriot Act
that were intended to be for named records or named
customers and had been used to collect information
on millions of Americans. The word “relevant” in the
Patriot Act was the reason why Representative
Sensenbrenner, who guided the Patriot Act through,
highlighted this and why the President’s review flags
that the interpretation of that word does violence to
the English meaning of the word “relevant”.

I asked BT categorically, “Does BT provide data in
bulk on thousands or millions of customers who are
not individually named in a RIPA notice to the UK
Government or its agencies and, if so, under what
legal authority?” I received absolutely no substantive
answer to that question and I cannot imagine, given
the severity of what that entails, why they could not
deny that.

Q803 Dr Huppert: Presumably, if they were not
doing it, they would be legally allowed to say, “No,
we’re not doing it”.

Nick Pickles: Absolutely.

Mr Davis: You would assume so.

Dr Huppert: Yes. There is a clear inference there.

Q804 Michael Ellis: Do you think that it performs a
public service or would perform a public service in
this country for officers of any of our security services
to steal material from their employers and flee to
Putin’s Russia? Do you think that would perform a
public service, Mr Pickles?

Nick Pickles: First, I think it is important to note that
the reason Mr Snowden is in Russia is because his
passport was revoked, not by any personal choice.

Q805 Michael Ellis: But do you think it would
perform a public service to steal material from your
employer? Would you think it was a public service if
someone who worked for you stole material from you

because they thought that perhaps they did not like
something you were doing and they fled to Putin’s
Russia? Do you think that would perform a service?
Nick Pickles: First, I think there is a very important
point here of public interest. Mr Snowden took a
decision that what he was seeing, particularly after a
very senior member of the intelligence community
told Congress they did not collect information on
citizens, which now appears to be a lie or at least a
deliberate untruth, exposing that lie was absolutely in
the public interest. The fact he is in Russia was not a
decision for Mr Snowden. It was forced upon him.

Q806 Michael Ellis: Right. Do you think that it is
okay, as a point of principle, for our security services
to be able to lawfully access landline and mobile
communications of criminals and terrorists but not
computer communications? Do you think there is such
a difference in those forms of communications that for
decades, perhaps even 100 years, security services or
police may have been able to access landlines or
mobiles but somehow computer forms of
communications should be okay for criminals and
terrorists to use?

Nick Pickles: No, absolutely not. I wrote a 3,500
word article for the Journal of Counter-Terrorism
earlier this year explaining how the principles of
directed targeted surveillance should apply on the
internet. My concern and what Mr Snowden has
revealed is the principles that underpinned previous
surveillance, named suspects, targeted investigations,
have been abandoned because the technology allowed
it, which is why the President of the United States
said, “Just because the technology allows us to do it
does not mean we should”.

Mr Davis: It also introduces, if I may say, some new
temptations. When the mechanism was attaching a
couple of crocodile clips to an exchange and then
listening in, that was self-limiting, only a few of those
could happen at any point in time, so getting a warrant
was not an issue. When you are accessing millions or
even billions of records, then getting a warrant
becomes something of a different problem, and so it
does introduce a new problem.

Q807 Michael Ellis: Would you agree too, Mr Davis,
that by its very nature, our law enforcement must keep
up with criminal activity, and if communications have
advanced to such a point, it is essential that our law
enforcement follows criminal activity? Otherwise they
will simply be able to divert their criminality from
landlines and mobiles to another form of
communication.

Mr Davis: Law enforcement should follow criminal
activity. This is why it was important that the
Judiciary Committee in the States, when looking at
block metadata collection, the very thing we are
talking about, challenged the claim of the agencies
that they had stopped 54 plots. It started out as several
hundred plots, then it was reduced to 54. The
Judiciary Committee went through them and reduced
it to one, which was a transfer of $8,500 from San
Diego to Somalia. There was not a single terrorist plot
stopped by this mechanism, not one.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 119

18 March 2014 Rt Hon David Davis MP and Nick Pickles

Q808 Michael Ellis: Can I just ask, Mr Pickles, is it
correct that Big Brother Watch are initiating legal
action against GCHQ?

Nick Pickles: Yes, we have a case pending before the
European Court of Human Rights.

Q809 Michael Ellis: You are using the Human
Rights Act, are you?

Nick Pickles: Yes, we are.

Q810 Michael Ellis: What are you seeking to sue
GCHQ about?

Nick Pickles: The two specific questions are the
collection of data on millions of British citizens is a
disproportionate interference with their right to
privacy, and the second argument is that the quality of
law means that an ordinary British citizen cannot read
the legislation and understand in what circumstances
they themselves may become subject to surveillance.
This goes back to the point of RIPA being written
before Facebook really existed and Google was still
in a garage when that happened.

Michael Ellis: Thank you very much.

Q811 Chair: Thank you, Mr Ellis. You have just
come back from Congress, from the United States,
you have looked at their oversight, and the heads of
their intelligence services have appeared eight times,
on average, each year before congressional
committees.

Mr Davis: That is correct.

Q812 Chair: Would you like to see the heads of our
services appear more often, not just before
intelligence and security, but other committees that
may be relevant, such as the Foreign Affairs
Committee or the Home Affairs Committee?

Mr Davis: Yes, I do, Chairman. I think that it is
difficult for them, there is no doubt about it, and they
have to have the option of saying, “I am sorry, I
cannot answer that question” but it has enabled
members of the committees—in fact, the Oversight
Committee themselves—to put in the public domain
things that they thought needed to be known to the
public and, in particular, excessive surveillance. So I
do think it is worthwhile. I think we are very similar
to the United States. We have the same enemies, we
have the same techniques, we have, broadly speaking,
the same public standards, and yet they manage to
maintain a level of openness in their surveillance that
is completely different to what we manage here.
Chair: Indeed. Mr Pickles?

Nick Pickles: Absolutely, I would echo that, and I
think the—

Chair: They have a better structure, you think?

Nick Pickles: They absolutely have a better structure.
For example, the first time the CIA Director appeared
on television was 1974, so I was pleased that we have
finally caught up with that in all this time. I think one
of the crystallising thoughts in the US was that as a
result, the oversight committees do not have to act as
spokespeople for the agencies, the agencies can
defend themselves. I think in this day and age, when
the revelations from Snowden broke, it was not
unreasonable to expect the agencies themselves to

explain this to the public, rather than having to rely
on the committees that are scrutinising them.

Q813 Chair: Because they are very well-known now,
the heads of the agencies. It is not like before when
they used to be unknown to the public. Most of them
have ended up in the House of Lords.

Mr Davis: In this country, the last of the agencies to
become public was the SIS in the 1994 SIS Act. I
took that Act through the House of Commons and it
was an explicit decision by the agency at that point to
become public, so with that comes some
responsibilities.

Just on the point of interrogation by oversight
committees, Chairman, your Committee has already
raised with the previous witness three occasions when
our oversight failed. That was the dodgy dossier, to
use the slang, rendition and 7/7, where they did not
highlight the failures there, and they did not foresee
Tempora and PRISM either. That is not the case in the
States. The Intelligence Committee did foresee some
of the issues that Snowden raised and raised them
before Snowden broke.

Q814 Dr Huppert: Can I come back to this
comparison between Britain and the US? I presume
you are both familiar with Yes, Prime Minister, and
there is a line there where Desmond Glazebook says,
“Good Lord, no. Any hint of suspicion, you hold a
full inquiry. Have the chap straight up for lunch. Ask
him straight out if there’s anything in it”. “And if he
says no?” “Well, you’ve got to trust a chap’s word.”
Do you think that is an accurate description—this is
probably a little harsh—and how do you think it
compares to what you found in the US?

Mr Davis: No, I think that is a little harsh, but
nevertheless, there is a problem of capture, there is
no doubt. It happens in the States too. I met Dianne
Feinstein, the head of the Senate oversight, which is
the more powerful of the two oversight committees,
and she was very, very pro the agencies. She was
behaving in the same way that Malcolm Rifkind
behaves and his predecessors on his committee have
behaved. He became like a spokesman for the
agencies. But it should be said that last week—I do
not know how many of the Committee have followed
this—there was an upper and downer of a row in the
Senate, and what the Chairman of the Judiciary
Committee described as the greatest speech ever made
in the Senate, when she attacked the CIA for
monitoring and bullying the staff of her committee.
So there is a robust relationship, and I think the aim
when we created the ISC was it would metamorphose
into a full-blooded Select Committee of the House
with an elected chairman and the rest of it, and that
has not yet happened. It is en route, I am sure, but it
has to accelerate.

Nick Pickles: The combined weight of the President’s
NSA review, that is the Privacy and Civil Liberties
Oversight Board review and that is the ISC review to
date, I think that in itself is quite telling as to how
informed the public debate is.

Q815 Dr Huppert: I was going to ask about those
two reviews. How have they gone down in the US?

Ev 120 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 Rt Hon David Davis MP and Nick Pickles

How have they been accepted, how entrenched are
they and how much resistance is there to
implementation of their recommendations?

Mr Davis: Perhaps the first thing to say is who was
on them. The President’s panel was run by Richard
Clarke, chaired by Richard Clarke, who was Bush’s
counter-terrorism head. Michael Morell was number
two, I guess, the Deputy Director of the CIA, very
well-known to our own heads here, and there were
three other legal experts, all of them established pro-
Obama legal experts. They came out with an
incredibly rigorous and robust	set of	46

recommendations, including effectively shutting down
the mass collection programme of metadata, and
incidentally, while they were at it, pointed out that the
American agencies had already shut down on their
own accord their email metadata collection
programme. But anyway, to come back to your point,
it was very, very well accepted, and people were
shocked by how robust it was, but everybody accepted
that it was the way to go.

Q816 Nicola Blackwood: I just want to take you
back to your comments about bulk data versus having
individual judicial oversight for each application for a
warrant, and putting aside the morality of it for a
moment, just ask about practical application, because
assuming that there will be secret evidence required
in order to prove the necessity for an application, do
you think that this would have to be considered in
camera or in CMP?

Nick Pickles: Obviously the Americans have the
FISA Court, which is a secret court, and one of the
recommendations from both reviews is that there
should be a public advocate there, so there is
somebody who can offer a differing point of view,
rather than having a one-sided court. Inevitably you
will have to use, I think—

Nicola Blackwood: Special advocates.

Nick Pickles: However, the special advocate system
is certainly an option. I think the interesting thing
across the board is now we have CMPs and post
Justice and Security what purpose the tribunal still
serves, given that the courts now have the ability to
hear these cases, and the tribunal itself is quite a weak
part of the oversight.

Nicola Blackwood:	The Investigatory Powers

Tribunal.

Nick Pickles: That is the American system.

Q817 Nicola Blackwood: You are suggesting that the
Investigatory Powers Tribunal should be overtaken by
judicial oversight through CMP?

Nick Pickles: I think so, so the tribunal as a redress
mechanism, not as an authorisation mechanism. If you
look at Judge Leon’s ruling in the NSA where he calls
bulk collection, “Almost Orwellian” that comes from
a public judicial process with a public judgment and
that is very valuable.

Q818 Nicola Blackwood: Yes, but once again,
moving back to the practicalities and trying to work
out how our court system would functionally approve
1,700 warrants through CMP annually, and possibly
more, and if you are talking about replacing bulk

surveillance as well, I assume that that is going to
spike, so I am just trying to understand what kind of
bulk system you imagine would replace it.

Mr Davis: I would not worry too much about the
1,700 warrants a year. That is not very many, bluntly.

Q819 Nicola Blackwood: No, it is not, but if you are
replacing the bulk surveillance as well and you are
having to justify that as well—

Nick Pickles: As far as I am aware, there is only 10
certificates that currently exist for the bulk collection
under section 8 and section 4. This was in the
President’s review when they found that you could get
the same information from traditional investigations
rather than using the bulk orders. That was mentioned
repeatedly, so I think it is more a mind-set change
than a bureaucratic change.

Mr Davis: There is no problem at all in holding those
hearings in secret, because after all, we are not talking
about locking somebody up, we are talking about just
gathering their information. What is a problem of
holding it in secret, which manifested itself with the
FISA Court, is the court changed the law. In effect,
the court took a new wording of law, the so-called use
of “relevant” and used it to justify mass collection,
which is a breach of the American Constitution. The
problem of a secret court is simply there is nobody
there to test the arguments that are being put and test
the judgments of the court, but it is the best option
you have, as it stands.

Chair: Thank you. We need to move on. I think David
Winnick has a quick supplementary, then finally Paul.

Q820 Mr Winnick:	Yes.	There is some

contradiction—perhaps	I am wrong—between

yourself and Mr Pickles, Mr Davis.

Mr Davis: Entirely possible.

Q821 Mr Winnick: Mr Pickles said that the
American system is such that the Chair of the
Oversight Committee does not act as a spokesman for
the committees, but the criticism of Senator Feinstein
is that she has constantly defended the committees,
CIA and FBI—CIA in particular—but the only time
she has criticised is in the last few days, when she has
discovered that the CIA have hacked into the phones
of her staff, who have been probing into the CIA. That
seems somewhat of a contradiction.

Chair: We will have a quick response and then we
need to move on.

Mr Davis: Very quickly, the committees that are not
directly involved are the committees on judiciary,
foreign affairs, defence and so on, all of whom have
nominees on the Oversight Committee. They do not
get captured. The oversight committees invariably, to
some extent, get captured, even in America.

Q822 Paul Flynn: The Justice and Security Act last
year is supposed to have made the Intelligence and
Security Committee a credible, independent
watchdog. Has it?

Mr Davis: No.

Q823 Paul Flynn: What shall we do?

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 121

18 March 2014 Rt Hon David Davis MP and Nick Pickles

Mr Davis: I have already said I would make it a
proper Select Committee of the House, elected by the
House, with the chairman elected by the House from
an Opposition Member.

Q824 Paul Flynn: I think we are indebted to you for
publishing just how much these metadata contain, and
when you see your activities on one day in
Manchester—

Mr Davis: On just one day.

Paul Flynn:—and I think, like all members of the
Committee, you are entirely blameless, going from
one good work here and helping an old lady cross
the road—

Mr Davis: From one bar to another, isn’t it?

Q825 Paul Flynn: Nothing like that, no, no. It does
seem extraordinary that there has not been a stronger
reaction from the public to the amount of surveillance
there is on what we would regard as our private lives.
Why do you think this has happened when it has
happened elsewhere in America?

Mr Davis: There are several reasons. The first reason
is to some extent the fault of the press. The Guardian
was very unpopular with other newspapers and it was
the paper running with the story, but because of
Leveson, nobody else wanted to help it. Part of it is
down to our respective parties. Each of them has
become very heavily involved in the process of
winning government and not wanting to criticise it
themselves.

Part of it is the Brits tend to be more trusting of their
own establishment, but that is changing. If you had

done a survey six months ago of whether people
thought this intrusion into their private lives was
important, you would have had a very low number
saying yes. Now the number has crossed 60% so it is
beginning to gather pace, and that is why I think the
Deputy Prime Minister and the Shadow Home
Secretary both made speeches in the same week
saying, “We have to get a grip of this”.

Q826 Paul Flynn: Just a final one: do you, as an MP,
believe that you can give 100% trust in what we are
being told when there is a next occasion when we are
asked to go to war?

Mr Davis: No, of course not. We have had three
occasions, as I said, where the ISC fell down, and they
fell down because of what they were told, not because
they were bad people—they are good people—but
because of what they were told, so no, we cannot.

Q827 Yasmin Qureshi: When you heard Sir Mark
saying that he has only looked at 6% of the thousands
of warrants, were you reassured by the fact that in his
opinion, based on 6%, everything was okay?

Mr Davis: No, I think the Commissioners are good
people doing impossible jobs.

Chair: That is a very quick answer, most grateful. Mr
Davis, Mr Pickles, thank you very much for coming
in.

Mr Davis: Our pleasure.

Chair: Mr Pickles, Mr Davis, if there is any further
information you wish to submit to the Committee,
please let us have it. Thank you.

Examination of Witness

Witness: James Brokenshire, MP, Minister for Security and Immigration, gave evidence

Q828 Chair: Apologies for keeping you waiting,
Minister, and congratulations, you have now added
immigration to your portfolio as the Minister of State
responsible for security. This is quite a heavy
workload you now have. I counted 52 different areas
of responsibility that now come under you.

James Brokenshire: Good afternoon, Mr Vaz, and
good afternoon to the rest of the Committee. Certainly
the responsibilities I hold in relation to immigration
and security are weighty, although the role that I had
previously as Security Minister also added a range of
other responsibilities that were not referenced in the
title, so I was previously the lead Minister for the EU
justice and home affairs policy, I was dealing with
modern slavery, I was dealing with the National Crime
Agency, organised crime, fraud, cyber, a whole range
of additional responsibilities that—

Chair: They have now gone, have they?

James Brokenshire:—Karen Bradley has taken on.
So while on the face of it, yes, it does appear a long
list, there was a long list that was there before and
those responsibilities have now been adjusted.

Q829 Chair: The Committee will look into this when
we produce our next report. The Minister for
Immigration has always been a fulltime job for one

person. Mark Harper and Damian Green had it as a
fulltime job, because it is a priority for the
Government. Obviously you are very experienced at
security matters, because you have been dealing with
it for four years.

James Brokenshire: Yes.

Q830 Chair: I think that our concern is to make sure
that there is proper oversight of immigration and we
will return to this later.

There is one issue that is in the public domain that
perhaps you can help us with. You had something of
a baptism of fire as Immigration Minister recently
when you referred to the “wealthy metropolitan elite”.
Who did you mean by that?

James Brokenshire: Mr Vaz, the simple point that I
was making was in relation to how uncontrolled
immigration can have benefits for some members of
our society, but how the most significant impact is
on the least well-off, those on low incomes, those on
low skills.

Chair: Sure.

James Brokenshire: That was the primary emphasis
that I was making in my speech. That was the simple
point.

Ev 122 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 James Brokenshire

Q831 Chair: Yes, but you used the words “wealthy
metropolitan elite” and the whole country thought this
was a reference to colleagues of yours in the
Government and those in the Opposition. Indeed, we
discovered as a result of your speech members of your
Cabinet were all telephoned by the press to ask if they
were employing people who were not British-born,
including the Prime Minister, the Home Secretary,
who I understand has a Brazilian cleaner, your
predecessor, the Deputy Prime Minister, who has a
Belgian employee, and members of the Shadow
Cabinet as well. What was the point of saying
“wealthy metropolitan elite”? What were you trying
to ask them to do, not employ people from abroad?
James Brokenshire: No. As I made very clear on the
day, I was not passing any judgment on anyone. It
was simply to make the point that some people had
benefited, those who have—

Chair: Including all the people I have mentioned?
James Brokenshire: A whole range of people have
benefited from immigration, as we have in our
immigration policy, to ensure that our economy
continues to grow and attract the brightest and the
best.

Q832 Chair: Your actual words were, “Wealthy
metropolitan elite who wanted cheap tradesmen and
services” and the Prime Minister then made a very
passionate defence of his children’s nanny. That was
a good way to begin a very difficult task as
Immigration Minister?

James Brokenshire: I think there was a very clear
point that I wanted to make, which was that under
the last Labour Government, immigration was out of
control, and the impact on that was on the least well-
off, those on low incomes, and that was the emphasis,
if you read the full speech and read that full section
on the point that I was making.

Q833 Chair: The Institute of Directors also read the
speech and described it as, “It is feeble and pathetic
to hear yet more divisive language from politicians on
immigration”. That was the Director General, Simon
Walker’s, statement on your speech. Have you
managed to calm him down?

James Brokenshire: As I say, I think I said in the
House that our emphasis is on attracting the brightest
and the best, on ensuring that those who are skilled,
who can contribute to our society of all different
creeds, colours, backgrounds, from whichever part of
the world they may come from, that they can
contribute. I have underlined that point very clearly,
and in my role as Immigration Minister, yes, I will be
focused on reducing that migration; yes, I will be
focused on immigration enforcement, but also I
recognise the contribution that migration can have to
the growth of our economy and why it is a question
of control and sustainability, which is the clear
message that I gave.

Q834 Chair: Did you inherit that speech from Mr
Harper or was that written by yourself?

James Brokenshire: It was written by myself and
my colleagues.

Chair: Cleared by the Home Secretary?

James Brokenshire: Yes, it was cleared within the
Home Office, and I—

Chair: Was it cleared by Downing Street as well?
James Brokenshire: Certainly the main parts of the
speech were shared externally, as one would expect of
a speech of that kind.

Q835 Chair: Finally from me, do you think Mr
Cable got the message, because of course you said on
6 March in that speech, “Rather condescendingly, on
Monday, about immigration he wrote, ‘Politicians
should start by sticking to the facts’. I suggest to Mr
Cable that he might reflect on his comments and start
doing this himself”. Do you think as a result of your
very powerful speech that Mr Cable now gets the
message?

James Brokenshire: My speech is on record, and I
have had a very good subsequent conversation with
Vince where we have been discussing issues where
we can work together on supporting business and
attracting the brightest and the best.

Chair: So it may have upset the Prime Minister and
the Mayor of London, but Mr Cable gets the message?
James Brokenshire: I think that I have made some
clear points in relation to who has suffered the
consequences of uncontrolled migration, and I think
that those are relevant and have received broad
support.

Q836 Dr Huppert: Just quickly to follow up on
this—and congratulations on the new role—
presumably you will be making sure that any of this
policy is evidence-based, and so taking account of the
UCL study that showed a £22 billion fiscal benefit
from immigration between 2001 and 2011, and the
new report that was eventually published by the
Government showing that what the Home Secretary
had been saying about job displacement was not as
accurate as it might be, presumably—

James Brokenshire: Just to be clear, Mr Huppert, that
report did not make that claim, and it welcomed the
research that the Migration Advisory Committee had
conducted and that the Home Secretary referenced,
and how it does recognise that uncontrolled
immigration can have an impact on job displacement.
That is what that report did say. It said that at times
where specifically there may be high levels of
immigration, and indeed at times of recession, that it
can have that impact. It also, if I may just quickly,
before you come back, does not take account of some
of the broader issues on integration and also the issues
in relation to, for example, the impact on public
services and how that is equally relevant in terms of
policy.

Q837 Dr Huppert: I am just trying to understand
how that fits with the executive summary, page 4,
“Overall, our assessment is there is relatively little
evidence that migration has caused statistically
significant displacement of UK natives from the
labour market. The evidence also suggests that where
there has been a displacement effect, this dissipates
over times”. How do I fit those words that I am
reading out from it with what you have just said?

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 123

18 March 2014 James Brokenshire

James Brokenshire: Because the report also goes on
to say that it recognised the valuable contribution—I
think it uses those precise words—in relation to the
Migration Advisory Committee’s research and how
that had contributed to the overall debate and
assessment, and how also it highlights in that report
that, for example, significant increases in EU
migration have only been a recent phenomenon and
therefore there is not that historic data, because the
report that you reference effectively is a collation and
analysis of historical reports and therefore it is looking
backwards. It does not necessarily take into account
some of these more recent phenomena that we have
seen from, say, EU migration.

Dr Huppert: I am struggling to find that sentence
anywhere in the report, but I am sure it is there.

Q838 Mr Clappison: Will you be as open to
receiving representations from Conservative
colleagues who believe that immigration control is
important, that it has been uncontrolled in the not too
distant past as well as the one that you have just
received from the Liberal Democrat Member and from
Mr Cable in favour of uncontrolled immigration?
James Brokenshire: I think we can safely say that
immigration is a topic that will provoke lively debate
on a number of different sides of the argument. I have
set out clearly how I believe that controlling
immigration is important for the impact on public
services, on the impact of integration and, yes, how it
can also impact on job displacement and hold wages
down, which is why I come back to my central point
on how this does impact on those least well-off and
those on the lowest wages.

Q839 Mr Winnick: Much was made, Minister, as
you know, of reducing immigration from the hundreds
of thousands to the tens of thousands, that was the
target. Am I not right in saying that to a very large
extent you are nowhere near the target that was set at
the beginning of this Government?

James Brokenshire: You are right in highlighting the
most recent net migration statistics, which showed
that while we have been successful in reducing net
migration from outside of the EU by around 82,000,
in relation to EU migration that has doubled over the
last year. I was very clear on the day when the
statistics were published in making that point, and
indeed, in my speech itself, and it is why we are
focused on cutting down on abuses of free
movement—

Q840 Chair: What is the answer to Mr Winnick’s
question: are you going to meet your target or not?
That is what he is asking.

James Brokenshire: Sorry, I thought Mr Winnick was
asking a broader point on where the figures were now,
but our focus does remain on reducing net migration
from the hundreds of thousands to the tens of
thousands—

Chair: So you are still on target?

James Brokenshire:—so we are still focused on
delivering that.

Q841 Mr Winnick: Minister, the accusation is often
made, certainly in the past, that your party is
particularly keen on what can be described as playing
a race card. Your remarks, which the Chair quoted
back to you, you would say that that has absolutely
nothing to do with playing the race card and hoping
it will work at the next election?

James Brokenshire: I absolutely and fundamentally
reject that accusation. I believe that we have an
incredible country that is blessed by so many different
races and creeds and backgrounds. I had a very
positive and I think warm and welcoming discussion
when, for example, I attended the meeting last week
with the National Congress of Gujarati Organisations
in Harrow, and we had a very fruitful and positive
discussion about migration and how they recognise
the need for controls to be in place. Therefore I
fundamentally reject any accusation of the kind that
you appear to be making.

Q842 Michael Ellis: Do you also reject any
suggestion that any talk of controlling immigration to
counter Labour’s uncontrolled immigration policy
over so many years is racist, which appears to be what
has been suggested to you?

James Brokenshire: No. I think that there is a fair
and proper debate in relation to having controlled
immigration and that sense of sustainability, given that
we have a picture that we see of net migration having
been below 80,000 for every year prior to 1998 and
above 140,000 for every year after 1998, and it is
those on low incomes and low wages that have borne
the brunt. Also, it is newly-arrived migrants that have
also borne the brunt as a result of this, so to suggest
in some way that there is that characterisation I think
is wholly spurious.

Michael Ellis: I would like to ask, if I may, now
about passports.

Chair: Sorry, we will keep passports for security.
Michael Ellis: Are we going to come on to that? I
will come back to that.

Chair: Yes, we certainly will come back to passports.
On immigration, then we must move on to security.
Nicola Blackwood.

Q843 Nicola Blackwood: Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Clearly uncontrolled immigration has difficult effects
on the labour market, but it is valuable for our
economy to have targeted admission for highly-skilled
migrants, and I know that the Home Office has been
bringing in the Chinese visas and also the tier 1
entrepreneurship. I just wonder what other steps you
are intending to bring in to ensure that we can reap
the benefits of immigration to ensure that we can
make the most of that to develop a fully flexible
labour market in that particular area.

James Brokenshire: Yes, because we also have our
tier 2 requirements in relation to skilled working and
ensuring that we are focused on attracting the
brightest and the best. I was giving evidence this
morning in relation to universities, and some of the
graduate routes, the PhD doctorate route that allows
people who have come here to study to then carry on
in work in those specialised routes. I think when you
look at the steps that we have put in place through the

Ev 124 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 James Brokenshire

different routes of migration, yes, how they are
targeted to support the economy, and while we have
cracked down on, for example, students and some of
the abuses that we have seen there, I have noted that
despite that broad reduction, the number of visas that
we are seeing from university sponsors has gone up
by 7% on the latest figures that were published. I think
that you can control immigration, that you can put in
place those measures to ensure that it is focused in
that way while maintaining our approach, which I
continue to endorse, of attracting the skilled, the
talented, the brightest and the best that will support
our economy.

Q844 Chair: Let us move on. We will have the
chance to probe you further on immigration on 1 April
and explore in more detail who are the wealthy
metropolitan elite, but not for today. I think we have
to move on to security.

As Security Minister, two people escaped from their
TPIMs, Ibrahim Magag and Mohammed Ahmed
Mohamed. This is when you were Security Minister,
as you still are. Have they been found yet?

James Brokenshire: The two individuals remain
outstanding.

Chair: Remain outstanding? You mean they are still
missing?

James Brokenshire: The police investigations are
ongoing and that they have still not been accounted
for, yes.

Chair: You mean they are still missing?

James Brokenshire:	They have not been

apprehended, so if that answers your question, then
yes.

Q845 Chair: You are reluctant to say they are still
missing and that they are not accounted for. Anyway,
so they are still missing, and are you still looking for
them? Is it still the view of the Government we should
find these people or have their TPIMs now expired
and there is really no reason to look for them
anymore?

James Brokenshire: No, the police investigations still
continue in relation to these two individuals and I
would like to see them brought to justice.

Q846 Chair: As a result of the fact that they have
gone missing, have you changed any of the processes
or procedures in the Home Office to prevent anyone
else going missing, or have all the other TPIMs now
expired? How many are outstanding?

James Brokenshire: We do not provide a running
commentary in relation to TPIMs, and there will be
a quarterly—

Q847 Chair: We do not need a running commentary.
Ministers have in the past always told a Select
Committee how many people. We do not want to
know what they are doing every day. We need figures.
Is there anyone left on a TPIMs order, because of
course they are about to expire?

James Brokenshire: What I can say, because we
provide quarterly reports, the last quarterly report
obviously was at the end of November when there
were eight people on TPIMs at that point in time. It

is right to say that a number had expired on the basis
of the two-year rule and we will be providing a
confirmation to Parliament in the coming days on the
normal quarterly reporting that will provide the full
update in relation to TPIMs.

Q848 Chair: That is very helpful. Do you know
when that report will be, Minister?

James Brokenshire: I cannot confirm to the
Committee, but we are intending to report to
Parliament very shortly.

Q849 Chair: Excellent. The Committee has heard a
great deal of evidence about the number of British
citizens who are travelling from the UK and going to
Syria and other theatres of war. We noted the fact that
Moazzam Begg, who originally started off at
Guantanamo Bay, was released and came back here—
you are familiar with his case—visited Syria, returned
to the United Kingdom, was about to go to South
Africa and then was arrested. What are your
estimates? We have been given estimates of around
about 400 people leaving the UK and going to Syria.
Do you have any more accurate figures to give before
this Committee?

James Brokenshire: It is very difficult to quantify in
exact terms. Certainly the numbers that I have seen
are in the low hundreds, so within the range or the
ballpark that you have indicated. In terms of, for
example, the whole of the EU, the numbers again that
I have seen is that around 2,000 Europeans are
thought to have travelled—

Q850 Chair: Where did those numbers come from,
because we seem to have better figures from the EU
than we have from our country? We know it is 2,000
from the EU, but we are unable to know our figures.
James Brokenshire: That is an overall estimate that
has been put together and, therefore—

Chair: Yes. Where has that from, do you know?
James Brokenshire: I will confirm to the Committee,
but certainly that is the number that I have seen
reported to me.

Chair: Yes, we have seen those figures as well, but
we do not know where they come from.

James Brokenshire: Whether they have come via
Gilles de Kerchove, the EU’s special representative in
relation to terrorism, and have been encapsulated in
that way, but perhaps I can provide the appropriate
source to the Committee following on from this.

Q851 Chair: That would be very helpful. So what
numbers are we putting? We have had a figure of 332
from the Metropolitan Police—which sounds pretty
accurate—who may have gone abroad, up to 400, I
think we were told. Do you have a better figure for us?
James Brokenshire: I am afraid I do not have a better
figure, and the operational agencies such as the police
would be best-placed to give that sort of indication.

Q852 Chair: Do they not give you any updates on
figures or do they just give it to—

James Brokenshire: They will obviously give some
information and I think the sorts of information that

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 125

18 March 2014 James Brokenshire

have been provided to the Committee are consistent
with the numbers that have been provided to us.

Q853 Chair: One of the issues of course that
concerns you and concerns this Committee is enabling
people to travel on British passports when we know
they are going abroad to participate in inappropriate
activity. We have had evidence from Dr Thomas
Hegghammer, who says that as many as one in nine
people who return are then involved in domestic
terrorism. He has not said that to do with the Syria
issue, but certainly in previous conflicts. You sound
surprised. Have you not heard that before?

James Brokenshire: No, I have not read that analysis,
but it is interesting to try to contextualise in that way.
Chair: Sure. You have not been seeing the videos of
this Committee. We will have to send you some CDs.
James Brokenshire: I look forward to it.

Chair: But if that figure is correct, it is an awful lot
of people coming back and involving themselves in—
James Brokenshire: I have been clear in a number of
the interviews and statements that I have made on the
ongoing risks and issues relating to Syria, that I do
see this as an issue that will be with us for the
foreseeable future because of the numbers that have
travelled and the risk attaching to individuals
returning. I think we do need to view it in those terms
and in that way, and therefore that is why an
increasing proportion of the casework of the Security
Service has that direct Syria focus attached to it.

Q854 Chair: Yes, but of course you have the power
to confiscate—not you, but through the Royal
prerogative the Home Secretary has the power to
confiscate British passports—to stop people going
abroad. How many times have you been able to do
that?

James Brokenshire: The latest figures in relation to
the use of the Royal prerogative, and this was
introduced last April, where the Home Secretary made
the change and underlined to the House the statement
in relation to how it could be used to refuse or
withdraw a passport from those we believe want to
travel to take part in extremist activity, terrorist
training or fighting, since then, the power has been
exercised 14 times to disrupt travel.

Q855 Chair: So 14 individuals have had their British
passport removed from them?

James Brokenshire: Yes.

Chair: That is since April 2013?

James Brokenshire: Yes.

Chair: Do you know or can you tell this Commission
how many people have subsequently asked for their
passports back of those 14?

James Brokenshire: I am not aware that there has
been any formal request or legal challenge in relation
to the exercise of the Royal prerogative to date.

Q856 Chair: In respect of those who are made
stateless as a result of new legislation that the House
has passed, you answered a debate on 11 February
2014. I think the whole House welcomed the fact that
the Government was introducing legislation to make
people stateless in certain circumstances. I think there

was a small rebellion. I think members of this
Committee may have voted against, so it was not
unanimous before they come in.

James Brokenshire: I can see from the shaking of the
heads around the table that may not be unanimous.

Q857 Chair: But can you just clarify for us, once
somebody is made stateless, they remain in the United
Kingdom, don’t they?

James Brokenshire: The powers under what was the
British Nationality Act, of which this amendment
derives from, does give the power to remove
citizenship either within the UK or outside of the UK,
and so it is possible that the power could be exercised
within the UK. In those circumstances, obviously the
individual would have restricted leave and it could
mean that there may be deportation proceedings that
could arise, because it is open to that individual to
seek citizenship from another state, and indeed, as I
think you will probably be aware, Mr Chairman, that
a lot of the issues around this were triggered by Al-
Jedda which the Supreme Court highlighted this
distinction.

Q858 Chair: Of course, but it also means even
though they are made stateless, if they do not apply
for the nationality of another country, they remain in
the United Kingdom and they can also apply to stay
in the United Kingdom. They are allowed to do that,
are they not? Doesn’t that defeat the whole purpose
of making them stateless?

James Brokenshire: No, because on that basis they
would be analogous to other migrants with temporary
leave and they would not attract the privileges
associated with British citizenship. They would not be
entitled to hold a British passport, they would not
have full access to public services and therefore the
denial of British citizenship in those circumstances
can be an important statement to make in relation to
those individuals.

Q859 Mr Clappison: Can I perhaps at this point ask
for your help in clearing up something that emerged
in evidence we took earlier from Nick Pickles of Big
Brother Watch, because he referred to the bulk
collection of information about people by a large
telecommunications company, in this case BT. He
referred to bulk collection by them of information
about individuals and that information possibly being
transmitted to Government agencies. He has supplied
us with correspondence about that, and I think the
tenor of his evidence was that British Telecom refused
to say whether or not they supplied information in
bulk about so-called metadata, I think it was termed,
about individuals to Government agencies or the
Government itself. We do have correspondence to that
effect, in which BT have set out their position.
Perhaps you can help us with this: do you know
whether or not BT or any other telecommunications
company supply data in bulk to any Government
agency?

James Brokenshire:	I have not seen the

correspondence to which you refer, Mr Clappison, and
therefore it is difficult for me to comment specifically

Ev 126 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 James Brokenshire

in relation to the points that have clearly been raised
by the last session.

Q860 Mr Clappison: Sorry to interrupt here. Can I
just put to you the question that was in the
correspondence, then I will give you a copy of the
correspondence itself? It says, “Does BT provide data
in bulk on thousands or millions of customers who are
not individually named in a RIPA notice to the UK
Government or its agencies, and if so, under what
legal authority?” My question to you is very simple:
do you know of any such provision of any such
information in bulk by BT or any other company to
any Government agency?

James Brokenshire: Clearly under the Data Retention
Directive, communication service providers retain
data, which is then subject to RIPA requests under the
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act for individual
agencies to make requests for metadata or that
communications data that they hold on to. Whether
that is the specific point that you are raising or not—

Q861 Mr Clappison: Can you take a look? I think
you have been supplied with questions. It is question
1, and it refers to, “Customers who are not
individually named in RIPA notices”. If you could
take a look at that, and if you wish to, the answer
from BT is on the next page. You may have a different
letter from me. I am sorry if that is the case. I think
the letter from BT, I think in the words of Mr Pickles
to us, does not answer quite that question. My
question to you is simply this: do you know of the
provision of any such bulk data by BT or anybody
else?

James Brokenshire: There is a reference to section 94
of the Telecommunications Act, which Mr Huppert, I
think, raised a question at a previous session in
relation to the provisions of this Act, and the Secretary
of State under those provisions may make orders
under the Act that, for national security reasons, may
not be disclosed. If the question relates to section 94
of the Telecommunications Act, then I am afraid I can
neither confirm nor deny any issues in relation to the
utilisation or otherwise of section 94.

Q862 Mr Clappison: Would such a provision fall
under section 94?

James Brokenshire:	The letter that you are

referencing from Nick Pickles appears to reference
section 94, and therefore I am assuming that that is
the question that he is posing, and the response that
BT has sought to provide must—based on what I am
reading here for the first time, and you will appreciate
that I have not had the opportunity to examine or to
take advice on this—

Mr Clappison: Take just a moment to have a better
look at it. Just have a better look at it, if you wish.
Do read the letter in full, to be fair. I am trying to
clear up what was said.

Chair: Mr Clappison, would it be helpful if the
Minister wrote to us about this issue, to be fair, or do
you want an answer now?

James Brokenshire: I wonder if it could be
appropriate. I am not—

Mr Clappison: I am happy to have an answer. I was
just hoping to clear it up in the view of the evidence
we had been given earlier on.

James Brokenshire: Perhaps, if you would allow me,
Mr Chairman, I can take the correspondence that has
been presented to me away and I will take advice on
how we can respond to the questions that Mr
Clappison has raised, which the Committee has
obviously had before it today. Is that all right?

Chair: That would be very helpful. Is that all right,
Mr Clappison?

Mr Clappison: Yes.

Chair: Very helpful. Could we go back to passports?
Mr Ellis was keen to come in.

Q863 Michael Ellis: Thank you. Minister, about the
deprivation of British passports: this was a matter of
some controversy, particularly from the Left
previously. Is it correct within your knowledge that
there was previously a power for incumbent Home
Secretaries to deprive people of British passports and
that was a power that existed until 1997 when it was
repealed by the previous Labour Government and
which we brought back about a year ago?

James Brokenshire: I think we are referencing here
the use of the royal prerogative. The Home Secretary
made her written ministerial statement on 25 April last
year, which set out the revised criteria that are open
to her to use her discretion under the prerogative to
refuse or withdraw passports. That is the basis upon
which this has been constructed.

Q864 Michael Ellis: That royal prerogative in the
last 11 or 12 months has been used 14 times to deprive
people of British passports.

James Brokenshire: Yes.

Q865 Michael Ellis: Something else was also said in
relation to the Syria matter, which was about those
vulnerable Syrians in need of direct humanitarian
assistance and the question about assistance from the
United Kingdom Government in domiciling them in
this country. Has any progress been made in that
regard?

James Brokenshire: Obviously we have provided
significant humanitarian support to Syria, as you will
be aware, Mr Ellis: the £600 million that was provide
for support in region. But the Home Secretary did
make a statement to the House in January about what
is known as the Vulnerable Persons Relocation
Scheme, in other words the contribution that we can
make directly in this country to individuals who have
been displaced and are in immediate and real need.
Michael Ellis: That is what I am talking about.
James Brokenshire: Since that statement was made
we have been working closely with the UNHCR to
identify the most vulnerable refugees and that is how
the scheme is intended to prioritise help for survivors
of torture and violence, women and children at risk or
in need of medical care. We have, I think, been
making good progress in relation to that. I can say
that we do expect the first families to arrive in the UK
before the end of this month and that we would then
have a sequenced programme of more families
arriving each month, working with the UNHCR.

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 127

18 March 2014 James Brokenshire

Q866 Michael Ellis: Can you say how many
families?

James Brokenshire: I cannot confirm the numbers at
the moment because it is precisely those steps that are
being finalised through the UNHCR in terms of the
support that would be provided here in the UK.
Michael Ellis: But this is a limited number of the
most vulnerable families from the Syrian conflict?
James Brokenshire: It is. We have said we envisage
that it will support several hundred people over the
next three years and it is that steady progress that we
do intend to make to reflect the perspective that we
should be providing some specific help and assistance
for those in the most need.

Michael Ellis: They start arriving at the end of this
month, you say.

James Brokenshire: Yes, that is the timeline we are
working to.

Q867 Michael Ellis: On the issue of the deprivation
of passports—this seems to be operating at the rate of
about one a month—do you expect that to continue?
Do you expect there to be a surplus of them? Or do
you expect that to be the average ratio, highly
infrequent deprivations of passports?

James Brokenshire: I think it is fair to say in relation
to the royal prerogative that it must be used
proportionately and it will only be used in the public
interest and sparingly. I think it is important that it is
utilised in that way so I do not think I would like to
make any predictions as to its future use. It will be
used on a case-by-case basis and the Home Secretary
does give very careful scrutiny and attention to the
applications or requests that may be forthcoming.
Michael Ellis: Thank you, Mr Chairman.

Chair: Thank you so much, Mr Ellis.

Q868 Dr Huppert: Just before I ask a bit more about
the passport/citizenship issue, in response to Mr
Clappison you talked about section 94 of the
Telecommunications Act 1984, and we just heard
from the Intelligence Services Commissioner that he
has no oversight of it and is not aware of anyone who
does. Do you think that is satisfactory?

James Brokenshire: This is a matter that would fall
within the purview of the Intelligence and Security
Committee and it is not that this would not be without
scrutiny; it is obviously within their role,
responsibility and remit to be able to look at these
issues that relate to section 94.

Q869 Dr Huppert: But none of the commissioners
has that role at all. When did the ISC last do an
inspection of it?

James Brokenshire: I cannot advise the Committee
about that but clearly I have heard the statements that
have been made by the commissioners in relation to it.

Q870 Dr Huppert: If I just move on to the issue of
citizenship deprivation, in fact to amplify what the
Chair said, the Committee voted three all with the
Chair’s casting vote being against it, as it happens,
when it was voted on—not quite how these things
work—and there are a number of issues with it. First
just on a factual basis, how many British citizens have

had their citizenship stripped in relation to Syria since
the war began?

James Brokenshire: What I can provide to you, Dr
Huppert, because we do not differentiate and specify
the nature of the breakdown in relation to these issues,
is that since 2010 24 individuals have been deprived
of British nationality on non-conducive grounds, and
17 on fraud grounds. Those are the overall numbers
but I am afraid I cannot disclose further details of the
precise reasons around that. If it would be helpful to
the Committee I may be able to give some sort of
briefing at a higher classification or on a confidential
basis, if that may assist your consideration.

Q871 Chair: Do you have an answer to Dr Huppert’s
question about Syria?

James Brokenshire: I cannot provide that detail in
relation to the overall number of the 24 and the 17
that I have referenced

Dr Huppert: It seems strange that this becomes a
security matter to understand how many of them are
Syria-related because it does it relate also to oversight.
It is very hard to tell if these powers are being used
appropriately if even a question like how many are
Syria-related, which strikes me as a fairly general
question, cannot be answered.

James Brokenshire: Deprivation of citizenship can
relate to acts contrary to national security,
unacceptable behaviours, war crimes, serious and
organised crime. It covers through the definition of
“non-conducive to the public good” a range of
different factors. We have not provided a breakdown
or analysis in relation to each of those different
headings but I will consider what we may be able to
share with the Committee on a confidential basis.

Q872 Dr Huppert: Thank you. One last question on
this issue. Do you accept that what you are essentially
arguing is that there are two categories of British
citizenship: there is British citizenship that cannot be
removed from somebody and there is British
citizenship that can be removed from somebody? Is
that your policy intention, to have these two categories
of British citizenship and are there other areas where
it would be important?

James Brokenshire: Deprivation of citizenship arises
from section 40 of the British Nationality Act 1981.
That is where this whole issue started off. Obviously
while we have the new proposals in the Immigration
Bill—which are currently before the House of
Lords—in relation to the power to make someone
stateless, there are powers already that if someone has
gained British citizenship through fraud it is possible
to withdraw the citizenship in that way. We are simply
moving from an extant provision and applying it to
circumstances that have been highlighted by the
Supreme Court in terms of our overall international
obligations and how we are able to extend it in the
way that is contemplated consistent with our
international-law obligations.

Dr Huppert: But you are still saying that of two
people who do identical acts and are both British
citizens, one could have their citizenship taken away
and one could not, which implies two classes of
British citizenship, surely.

Ev 128 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 James Brokenshire

James Brokenshire: The powers under the relevant
legislation obviously focus on naturalised citizens and
to the narrow extent that the provisions apply, then the
Act operates in that way. But I would underline that
in relation to the new provisions that we are
introducing in the Immigration Bill you would
describe them as exceptional. The wording that we
have highlighted is that we would have to satisfy a
test that was seriously prejudicial to the vital interests
of the UK and that is a much narrower test than
already exists under the provisions of the British
Nationality Act 1981.

Chair: Thank you so much, Dr Huppert.

Q873 Mr Winnick: Obviously there is concern about
those who go to Syria to fight if only because of the
dangers that the Government is perfectly aware of, as
are the rest of us, that they could potentially be
terrorists.

I saw an interview with a brother of the suicide
bomber—the British person, presumably UK citizen,
in Syria who was a suicide bomber—I do not know if
you saw the interview—a member of the family in
Crawley—and he strenuously denied that his brother,
who I have just been referring to, would ever have
been a danger in Britain. If you have not seen the
interview perhaps you are not able to comment. But
do you think there is quite a possibility that the
argument that there are those who go out for what
they consider to be a very just purpose, to fight the
Assad regime, would not have the slightest wish to
inflict harm here in the United Kingdom?

James Brokenshire: I think the real difficulty with all
of this, Mr Winnick, is that people who travel to Syria
risk almost certainly coming into contact with
extremists linked to Al-Qaeda who may seek to
exploit those individuals, to radicalise them, and
therefore those individuals may pose a risk when they
return to the UK because from the reporting I see,
there are groups aligned to Al-Qaeda operating in
Syria that would have ambitions to attack the west. I
know people have that sense of wanting to provide
humanitarian assistance for example, but in travelling
to Syria they risk coming into contact with those
group. You see some of this very disparate, fluid
position on the ground there, how we have some of
these extremist groups fighting and killing each other
to take ground; to have a position. Therefore while
some would seek to present it in a particular way, our
very clear and stark advice is not to travel to Syria.
The Syrian people and the Free Syrian Army have not
said that they want foreign fighters in that direct sense.
The Syrian people want humanitarian assistance. They
want that diplomatic solution to the crisis in Syria. So
we say that people travelling does not assist the
situation and puts them in very direct and real risk
to themselves.

Q874 Mr Winnick: Given that some do go—the
numbers have been bandied about—what robust steps
have been taken to deal with the situation as these
people return to the UK?

James Brokenshire: Clearly the security service and
the police monitor travel. There are means of
assessing advance passenger information and at times

to prevent people travelling, as needs be, if there is a
concern as to their risk. We have seen arrests and we
have seen charges that have arisen on people
returning. But that is not to say that everyone who has
travelled, and travelled back, would provide that threat
or risk to this country. The point is that within those
who have travelled and travelled back there may well
be a cadre within that group that either has been
radicalised or has been tasked or who may by their
actions upon their return galvanise others to then
travel and thus perpetuate the circle. It is obviously
those interests that the police and the security service
resolutely have in mind in the action they take.

Q875 Mr Winnick: It is going to be a difficult one
because as you say, it is quite likely that hopefully
virtually all who come back will not have any desire
to inflict harm on their own country. So you recognise
how difficult it would be for the security and police
authorities to try to find out if there is a potential
danger.

James Brokenshire: That is their absolute focus and
equally why I make the point that the challenges
relating to Syria from a Counter-Terrorism perspective
are likely to be with us for the foreseeable future.

Q876 Paul Flynn: Following what David Winnick
has said, do you think it would be wise to prosecute
some of these people when they come back from
Syria? I think most of us are very surprised that
British-born and British-educated Muslims feel so
strongly about the issue in Syria that they are willing
to risk their lives. If we do prosecute them, do you
think it would intensify the alienation they feel and
lead to more trouble?

James Brokenshire: My simple point at the outset is
that I absolutely understand people’s desire to help in
Syria when we see all the appalling tragedy that we
see played out on our television screens week in and
week out. First the message I would say is that we
believe that the best way for people to help is through
humanitarian organisations that are able to provide aid
and assistance directly. But in terms of people
returning to the UK, each case has to be considered
individually. Not everyone who has returned will have
been involved in those terrorist organisations that I
have referred to. If the police refer a case to the Crown
Prosecution Service, they would have to consider that
there is sufficient evidence for an offence to have been
breached and if so whether it is in the public interest
to prosecute. It does relate to the evidence that is there
and the strong sense that the evidence supports that
investigation and supports the CPS, who are
independent of Government and independent in that
sense on the decisions they take in bringing any
action. It has to be grounded in examining each of
those individual cases.

Q877 Paul Flynn: A gang leader from south London
who was convicted of serious crimes including
violence was recommended very strongly by the
courts to be deported from the country because they
assessed him as being a danger to the public. There
was doubt about his country of origin and he was
relocated without the knowledge of the local authority

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 129

18 March 2014 James Brokenshire

or the neighbours in a suburban street in my
constituency. Is this a satisfactory situation do you
think?

James Brokenshire: I do not know the situation or
the individual case that you highlight, Mr Flynn, but
I can understand the concern about the cause within
your community. If you were willing to share some
further details, then I would certainly be prepared to
look into that.

Paul Flynn: I have taken it up and we are waiting for
some action. We were informed that the only place he
could be relocated in the whole of Britain happened
to be in my constituency, which I find extraordinary,
but I presume from your answer that there are no
people in this category in your constituency.

James Brokenshire: I would like to look into the
specifics as to why you have been advised on the basis
that you have and I would hope to be able to report
back.

Q878 Michael Ellis: Minister, on the issue of Syria
and the Prevent strategy the Government has in
dealing with the issue generally, the strategy tends to
focus on the division between the West and some
elements of Islam but what about a refocus? Bearing
in mind the sectarian nature of the fighting in Syria,
has some consideration been given towards a refocus
of the Government’s Prevent strategy towards
divisions of a sectarian nature?

James Brokenshire: It is important to go back to first
principles as to what the Prevent strategy was
intended to deliver. We made a very conscious
decision at the start of this Parliament that Prevent
should be focused on preventing terrorism and
preventing pathways to terrorism rather than on
broader integration of community-tension issues and
that that should be a matter for the Department for
Communities and Local Government and for
communities more generally. When I look at the threat
and the challenge to this country from a security and
a counter-terrorism perspective, the threat still does
reside in principle terms from Al-Qaeda and from the
groups that affiliate to Al-Qaeda’s perverse narrative.
So I think it is right that our Prevent strategy does
retain that focus on that. Indeed I was in Waltham
Forest yesterday meeting with community leaders and
looking at some of the work that is taking place there
as to that sense of communities coming together and
providing that strong sense of cohesion to prevent
extremism and radicalisation from taking hold in any
way. They are doing a very good job there.

On issues of tensions within communities, if issues
arise then absolutely the law is there to be upheld. On
broader cohesion issues, then these are elements that
I think that as the Government we need to have in
mind, taking conscious account of the continuing
strife, some of the tensions that we have seen in Syria
and therefore whether that may have any resonance
here. We have not seen that to date but it is something
that we need to be alive to.

Q879 Michael Ellis: On a different point, one
relating to your position as Minister for National
Security, is there anything in connection with the
disappearance of the Malaysia Airlines flight that you

are looking at with a view to the national security
apparatus and structure in this country? You have
mentioned for example that you still see a principle
threat from certain quarters. Is there anything about
that disappearance that you are looking at?

James Brokenshire: At this stage we are seeing how
this appalling event is developing. It is difficult at this
stage to form any conclusions. Obviously we take our
aviation-security approaches extremely seriously. It is
why we have the protective measures that we have:
that we use our whole-body security scanners,
explosive-trace detection equipment and other
measures to help detect devices that we have seen
before; and indeed in the EU cargo regime that we
have advanced. It is also important to underline the
issue of any potential risk of insiders. It is one that we
take equally extremely seriously. All aircrew and
other staff that work airside are subject to the same
security screening on prohibited items as passengers
are. Aircrew and others with access to aircraft and
other sensitive areas are also required to undergo
background checks. It is always that question of
vigilance and being focused on risks as they occur but
it is something that we do take very seriously.

Q880 Chair: Did it surprise you how easy it was to
switch off the communications system, that it was on
the dashboard and anyone could just switch it off so
nobody would know where the plane was? Is this
something that we can pick up in the way in which
we look at aviation security? Obviously the searching
of people who go on planes is something we do
extremely well, especially at airports. But this must
have come as a surprise to you that somebody could
just in the cockpit switch off a communications
system by the flick of a switch.

James Brokenshire: As I have highlighted on the
background checks that are undertaken, we do
recognise the issue of insider risk in relation to this. I
am sure that everyone will be reflecting on this
incident as and when we get better understanding of
precisely what has occurred. At this stage the facts are
still very thin.

Q881 Michael Ellis: If I could just come back on
that, we do not know at this stage exactly what
happened, and I understand from reporting that there
may be some reason why the ACARS and other
similar systems can be switched off in routine
circumstances, but will the Government undertake to
continue to look at all of these wider issues to see if
any lessons can be learned and to see if we can keep
these sorts of procedures and situations under constant
review to minimise risk?

James Brokenshire: Of course. We remain vigilant to
the risk and are obviously informed by the
assessments provided by JTAC—the Joint Terrorism
Analysis Centre—and others in relation to the overall
security picture and the threat picture and clearly will
respond to new information and details as they
emerge. I think everyone is looking very closely at
what information will be forthcoming in relation to
this.

Ev 130 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 James Brokenshire

Q882 Dr Huppert: Minister, I think this morning
you were at the House of Lords Science and
Technology Select Committee. I hope that went well.
We have had police officers giving evidence to the
Public Accounts Committee. We have had community
and local government Ministers coming here. Quite
often these things are interdisciplinary and cover
several different areas. In the US the agencies can be
questioned by the intelligence committees, the
judiciary committees and various others but uniquely
here the Government seems to insist that only the
Intelligence and Security Committee can ask
questions of the agency heads and you will know the
Home Secretary refused to allow any of the agency
heads to come and talk to this Committee. Why is
that? Why do you not want any other parliamentarians
to be able to ask some questions, obviously with
safeguards for information that needs to be kept
secure?

James Brokenshire: I think the Home Secretary
addressed this in detail when she appeared before this
Committee just before Christmas and I do not think
there is much more that I can add to the contribution
that she made. The Intelligence and Security
Committee, which has been strengthened with
additional resourcing as a result of the measures that
this Government has introduced through the Justice
and Security Act 2013 is able to handle sensitive
material and therefore is able to question—and, I
know, questions robustly—the agencies in relation to
their work. We have seen the first public hearings,
which are something I talked about when taking the
Justice and Security Bill through the House of
Commons, how I hoped that that would happen. That
has now happened and I think that we have seen a
continued development in relation to the scrutiny of
the agencies, which I welcome. I believe that it is right
for the ISC to be given the opportunity with their
enhanced powers and with the enhanced staffing they
have received as well, to do that job.

Q883 Dr Huppert: Nobody is saying they should not
be allowed to do their job. The question is why all
other parliamentarians are barred from doing our jobs,
because that is the consequence. Nobody would
suggest that you should not go and talk to the House
of Lords Science and Technology Committee because
they do not have the specialist background in
immigration stuff that we have. Everywhere else there
is this understanding. In the US it seems to work fine.
Will you at least go back and have a look at whether
this could be opened up because it would probably be
good for the agencies if they were seen to be more
protected and other people could ask questions,
though I, of course, accept there are things they would
not be able to say in public session.

James Brokenshire: We consulted on this on the
Green Paper that preceded the Justice and Security
Act on various different models—whether an
inspector general would be a different model that
would work—and we considered that at that point and
decided that we would retain the existing
commissioners but strengthen the ISC. Careful
thought was given to the oversight arrangements and

I believe that, as the House has recently legislated on
this, we should allow the ISC to get on with that job.

Q884 Dr Huppert: The House did not legislate on
whether other committees could have a look. But in
the US, as I understand it, elected representatives are
automatically given access to classified material upon
election. Why do you think the US trusts elected
representatives at that sort of level and this
Government does not?

James Brokenshire: I cannot comment on the US
system. What I can comment on is the UK system
with the Intelligence and Security Committee: its
work and the way in which it has been strengthened;
the oversight of the agencies through the Secretaries
of State and through the commissioners themselves. I
believe that we have very robust system and one of
the strongest systems in the world to provide that level
of oversight.

I think the handling of sensitive material is one that
does need to be conducted with care, how we can
ensure that information that is secret remains secret
and particularly how it could be to our disadvantage
if it came into the hands of those who have malign
intent against this country.

Mr Winnick: I do not think he really believes what
he says.

Chair: Order, Mr Winnick

Q885 Yasmin Qureshi: Minister, I know there has
already been a question about taking away citizens’
nationality or citizenship. It is a question that many
members have asked. I know Mr Ellis says it is an
obsession of the Left that they always seem to be
against taking people’s citizenship away. I have to say,
I hope you heard me, it is not always a case of Left
and Right because the Honourable Member for North
East Somerset, not a well-known left winger, said that
the Queen should not have two different sets of
citizenship; that if you have citizenship, everyone
should be equal. You have the bizarre situation that I
can have my citizenship stripped away but not Mr
Flynn, sitting next to me. I am not sure it is a question
of Left and Right. I am sure it is a question of fairness.
Can I ask two questions? Can you ask the Home
Secretary, and perhaps the Government, to reconsider
this because it is first unfair? Secondly—and this is
the more important thing—would you agree with me
that if you take away somebody’s citizenship you
cannot deport them because they need to have
documents to be able to travel to another country?
They do not apply for nationality of another country.
You cannot get rid of them from the country. So was
this just a cosmetic exercise?

James Brokenshire: I think, Ms Qureshi, that it is
important to understand that the policy approach had
been informed by the Al-Jedda case and that the focus
had been on individuals that could access the
citizenship of another country. I recognise how the
approach that is set out in the Immigration Bill can
leave someone stateless but the focus had been on
individuals who had been able to apply for another
citizenship. It is also worth underlining that the law as
it exists today embodies that distinction on naturalised
citizens and how steps can be taken to remove

Home Affairs Committee: Evidence Ev 131

18 March 2014 James Brokenshire

citizenship in certain circumstances. That is what the
law already says and it is simply in these exceptional
circumstances where we judge that it would be
seriously prejudicial to the vital interests of the UK—
so this is a very high bar that we are setting in those
circumstances—that that reserve power is justified.

Q886 Yasmin Qureshi: Going back to you about
taking away someone’s citizenship if they are
naturalised as opposed to being born into the
citizenship, do you not think it is fundamentally
unequal and unfair to have effectively two classes of
citizenship? Forget about the fact that it is existing
law. Do you not think there is something
fundamentally unfair about this?

James Brokenshire: I suppose the point is that the
grant of citizenship by this country is a privilege that
obviously brings with it certain responsibilities and
duties. That is why it is in these exceptional
circumstances that we believe a reserve power in that
very circumscribed way is appropriate and why we
are bringing forward the provisions that are contained
in the Immigration Bill.

Chair: Very helpful.

Q887 Paul Flynn: You did not hear the evidence of
Mr Davis, your colleague, earlier on.

James Brokenshire: No.

Paul Flynn: He is less optimistic about the role of the
Intelligence and Security Committee and he had very
strong views about that. He did suggest that as
Members of Parliament, if there was another conflict
in the world and we were looking for advice, the
advice is likely to be unreliable. Do you have absolute
confidence that we will not be misinformed as we
were in 2003, 2006 and on 7/7?

James Brokenshire: I believe that the changes we
have made through the Justice and Security Act to
strengthen the ISC have bolstered its work; that with
the oversight provided by Secretaries of State,
commissioners, and the enhanced ISC, as well as the
way in which the work of the agencies is
circumscribed through the legislation, the robust
challenge that is provided by the commissioners—I
did not hear your earlier session but I know that the
commissioners do provide that robust challenge—that
all that does set us as has having one of the strongest
regulatory regimes anywhere in the world around our
intelligence and security agencies. I do believe that. It
was something that we did examine through the Green
Paper, as to what further enhancements or steps were
to be made. That is what has led to the changes to the
ISC and I believe that that has been for the better.

Q888 Paul Flynn: I am sure you will find it an
inspiring and informative experience to read the
evidence of Mr Davis and Mr Pickles on their trip to
Washington where they have an entirely different view
from yours.

On the question of building counter-terrorism capacity
overseas, we spend a relatively small amount on this:
about £30 million. Do you think we should do more
to invest in projects, on areas such as strengthening
institutions against corruption and on improving
border controls in other countries?

James Brokenshire: The overseas Justice and Human
Rights partnership-work and that capacity building
that you reference is something that is led by the
Foreign Office. The Foreign Secretary, I think, set out
clearly the challenges that he identified on ensuring
our ability to work with countries that may not adhere
to the human rights and rule of law standards that we
operate in this country. I think he is right to fasten
upon that. The Foreign Office has been taking forward
a number of projects around work on human rights
and legal compliance, on evidence basis—on ensuring
that you are relying more on evidence than
confession—and I think that that is to the good. With
those capacity-building works the Foreign Office does
scrutinise all project applications, ensuring they
deliver value for money, and they are confident that
we can deliver our planned work within the funding
arrangements for this year and next year and that is
obviously funded in large measure from the Foreign
Office’s counter-terrorism programme fund, which is
the £30 million you referenced.

Q889 Chair: Could you just clarify precisely what is
happening with e-Borders? We had evidence from Sir
Charles last week to say that e-Borders was now
terminated and rolled into a new border-systems
programme. Whatever it is called—and I appreciate
that you have written to the Committee about this—is
it still the Government’s intention that there should be
full exit checks by the time of the general election on
7 May?

James Brokenshire: Yes. I think Sir Charles did
highlight this point in his letter to the Committee
where he said that the Home Office is committed to
delivering exit checks by 2015. This has not changed
and that is reliant on our API—Advanced Passenger
Information—coverage as supplemented by
embarkation checks at ports as well. That does remain
our focus and our commitment and how our work on
this broadened into our border systems programme,
which is looking at a number of the different systems
that the Border Force utilises.

Q890 Chair: As far as the internet is concerned, this
Committee has heard a great deal of evidence to
suggest that radicalisation has moved out of the
classroom and madrasas and on to the internet with
500 million tweets every day; 100 hours of videos
being uploaded to YouTube; 300 million photographs
uploaded on to Facebook, some of them by the
fighters overseas in Syria. Are any new approaches
being made by the Government to the internet
companies?

James Brokenshire: I know you know, Mr Vaz, that
we have our Counter-Terrorism Internet Referral Unit
that identifies illegal material and seeks to take that
down.

Chair: Yes, and we saw them for ourselves last week.
James Brokenshire: I can update the Committee that
the last number I have seen of the amount of material
they have taken down has now reached, I think,
29,000 items. So there is active work that the CTIRU
is doing. But I am very conscious of the need to
continue to work with industry. I have been having
discussions with them around one of the themes that

Ev 132 Home Affairs Committee: Evidence

18 March 2014 James Brokenshire

you touched on in a previous Home Affairs Select
Committee report—we do read these things—on
codes of practice, for example; on the way that
internet companies respond to requests or flagging by
our police units that have responsibility for this.
Equally the potential use of filtering of material and
the work of those companies themselves. On material
that is not unlawful there is a threshold that is set
that the CTIRU working with the Crown Prosecution
Service will examine and attest to but equally there is
material that does not necessarily cross that threshold
but in the same way that family filters would wish to
filter other material, that is a separate category that
companies themselves would wish to make their own
decisions on whether that is appropriate for them to
host in that way. So it is that part of the broader
discussion that we are having, as well as the
opportunities for those companies to support different
and more moderate voices in some of this debate.
Again that sense of capacity building within
communities so that there is a broader debate around
some of these things, whether this be on travel to
Syria or otherwise, I think is very healthy. I believe
that this Committee itself attended an event with
Google last week around some of these themes and it
is that sort of initiative that I am very keen to
encourage.

Q891 Chair: We welcome that. Let me end where
we began by congratulating you on your new
portfolio. You have been before this Committee for

the last four years and you have clearly been a very
competent security Minister. The concern of this
Committee is taking on a whole additional job as
Minister for Immigration. I am not saying that you are
not able to do it. You are clearly a very safe pair of
hands and the Home Secretary has great confidence in
you. But it is a very large area and this Committee has
produced many reports about the immigration service,
which resulted in part in the decision to abolish the
UKBA, take it back into the Home Office. These are
two very big jobs and we are not saying that you are
not capable of doing it, by any means, but we are
concerned on the scrutiny basis, that with 42 separate
issues that you need to deal with, it is a tall order for
even someone as able and as effective as yourself.
James Brokenshire:	The Home Secretary has

obviously asked me to take on the responsibilities that
I hold and I think that there are opportunities here in
terms of the way in which the security agenda and
some of the work around immigration does dovetail,
around security at the border, which does cross over
into both of these arenas. As I say, having held and
organised crime and Counter-Terrorism brief before,
plus EU, plus other things on top of that, there is
insight that I am able to bring in relation to both sides
of this and I will obviously be doing my utmost to
fulfil those responsibilities to the fullest of my
abilities.

Chair: We are sure you will. Thank you very much
for coming here today.

James Brokenshire: Thank you.

Printed in the United Kingdom by The Stationery Office Limited
05/2014	039936	19585