EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL POLICIES

POLICY DEPARTMENT f

CITIZENS' RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

National programmes for mass
surveillance of personal data in
EU Member States and their
compatibility with EU law

Constitutional Affairs

Justice, Freedom and Security

Gender Equality
Legal and Parliamentary Affairs

Petitions

EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

DIRECTORATE GENERAL FOR INTERNAL POLICIES
POLICY DEPARTMENT C:

CITIZENS' RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

CIVIL LIBERTIES, JUSTICE AND HOME AFFAIRS

NATIONAL PROGRAMMES FOR MASS
SURVEILLANCE OF PERSONAL DATA
IN EU MEMBER STATES AND THEIR
COMPATIBILITY WITH EU LAW

STUDY

Abstract

In the wake of the disclosures surrounding PRISM and other US surveillance
programmes, this study makes an assessment of the large-scale surveillance
practices by a selection of EU member states: the UK, Sweden, France,
Germany and the Netherlands. Given the large-scale nature of surveillance
practices at stake, which represent a reconfiguration of traditional intelligence
gathering, the study contends that an analysis of European surveillance
programmes cannot be reduced to a question of balance between data
protection versus national security, but has to be framed in terms of collective
freedoms and democracy. It finds that four of the five EU member states
selected for in-depth examination are engaging in some form of large-scale
interception and surveillance of communication data, and identifies parallels and
discrepancies between these programmes and the NSA-run operations. The
study argues that these surveillance programmes do not stand outside the
realm of EU intervention but can be engaged from an EU law perspective via (i)
an understanding of national security in a democratic rule of law framework
where fundamental human rights standards and judicial oversight constitute key
standards; (ii) the risks presented to the internal security of the Union as a
whole as well as the privacy of EU citizens as data owners, and (iii) the potential
spillover into the activities and responsibilities of EU agencies. The study then
presents a set of policy recommendations to the European Parliament.

PE 493.032

EN

This document was requested by the European Parliament's Committee on Civil Liberties,
Justice and Home Affairs.

AUTHORS

Prof. Didier Bigo, Director of the Centre d'Etudes sur les Conflits, Liberté et Sécurité (CCLS)
and Professor at Sciences-Po Paris and King's College London

Dr. Sergio Carrera, Senior Research Fellow and Head of the Justice and Home Affairs
Section, Centre for European Policy Studies, CEPS

Mr. Nicholas Hernanz, Research Assistant, Justice and Home Affairs Section, CEPS

Dr. Julien Jeandesboz, Assistant Professor at the University of Amsterdam and Associate

Researcher at CCLS

Ms. Joanna Parkin, Researcher, Justice and Home Affairs Section, CEPS

Dr. Francesco Ragazzi, Assistant Professor in International Relations, Leiden University

Dr. Amandine Scherrer, European Studies Coordinator and Associate Researcher at CCLS.

The authors would like to thank the following experts who have contributed to the research
of this briefing note: Axel Arnbak, cybersecurity and information law researcher at the
Institute for Information Law, University of Amsterdam; Jelle van Buuren, Leiden
University, Center for Terrorism and Counter-terrorism; Ot van Daalen, Bits of Freedom;
and Mark Klamberg, Senior Lecturer at the Department of Law of Uppsala University.

RESPONSIBLE ADMINISTRATOR

Mr Alessandro DAVOLI

Policy Department Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs
European Parliament
B-1047 Brussels

E-mail: alessandro.davoli@europarl.europa.eu

LINGUISTIC VERSIONS

Original: EN

ABOUT THE EDITOR

To contact the Policy Department or to subscribe to its monthly newsletter please write to:
poldep-citizens@europarl.europa.eu

Manuscript completed in October 2013.

Source: European Parliament, © European Union, 2013

This document is available on the Internet at:
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/studies

DISCLAIMER

The opinions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do
not necessarily represent the official position of the European Parliament.

Reproduction and translation for non-commercial purposes are authorised, provided the
source is acknowledged and the publisher is given prior notice and sent a copy.

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

CONTENT

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY	5

INTRODUCTION	7

1.	Controversy between the actors about the scale of the problem 11

1.1.	Large scale electronic surveillance in democracies: compatibility or not?	12

1.2.	Political and ethical controversies regarding the use of these technologies by

intelligence services: the question of legitimacy	16

2.	The EU member states practices in the context of the revelations of

NSA large scale operations	19

2.1.	Technical features	20

2.2.	Scale	21

2.3.	Data types and data targets	22

2.4.	Processing and analysis of data	23

2.5.	Cooperation between national	and international security actors	24

2.6.	Legal regimes and oversight	25

3.	Legal Modalities of Action at EU level and Compatibility with EU Law 27

3.1.	National Security and Democratic Rule of Law	28

3.2.	Whose Security? Sincere Cooperation and Citizens' Liberties Compromised 34

3.3.	Home Affairs Agencies	36

4.	Conclusions and Recommendations: Implications of Large Scale

Surveillance for Freedom, Fundamental Rights, Democracy and
Sovereignty in the EU	39

4.1.	General conclusions	39

4.2.	Policy Recommendations	42

List of academic references	48

ANNEX 1 - The EU member states practices in the context of the

revelations of NSA large scale operations	50

3

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

4

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Surveillance of population groups is not a new phenomenon in liberal regimes and the
series of scandals surrounding the surveillance programmes of the US' NSA and UK's
GHCQ only reminds us of the recurrence of transgressions and illegal practices carried
out by intelligence services. However, the scale of surveillance revealed by Edward
Snowden should not be simply understood as a routine practice of intelligence services.
Several aspects emerged from this series of revelations that directly affect EU citizens'
rights and EU institutions' credibility in safeguarding those rights.

First, these revelations uncover a reconfiguration of surveillance that enables
access to a much larger scale of data than telecommunication surveillance of the
past. Progress in technologies allows a much larger scope for surveillance, and platforms
for data extraction have multiplied.

Second, the distinction between targeted surveillance for criminal investigations
purposes, which can be legitimate if framed according to the rule of law, and large-scale
surveillance with unclear objectives is increasingly blurred. It is the purpose and the
scale of surveillance that are precisely at the core of what differentiates
democratic regimes and police states.

Third, the intelligence services have not yet provided acceptable answers to the recent
accusations raised towards them. This raises the issue of accountability of
intelligence services and their private sector partners and reinforces the need for a
strengthened oversight.

In light of these elements, the briefing paper starts by suggesting that an analysis of
European surveillance programmes cannot be reduced to the question of a
balance between data protection versus national security, but has to be framed in
terms of collective freedoms and democracy (Section 1). This section underlines the fact
that it is the scale of surveillance that is at the heart of the current controversy.

The second section of the briefing paper outlines the main characteristics of large-scale
telecommunications surveillance activities/capacities of five EU member states: UK,
Sweden, France, Germany and the Netherlands (Section 2). This section reveals in
particular the following:

•	Practices of so-called 'upstreaming' (tapping directly into the communications
infrastructure as a means to intercept data) characterise the surveillance
programmes all the selected EU member states, with the exception of the
Netherlands for whom there is, to date, no concrete evidence of engagement in
large-scale surveillance.

•	The capacities of Sweden, France and Germany (in terms of budget and human
resources) are low compared to the magnitude of the operations launched by
GCHQ and the NSA and cannot be considered on the same scale.

•	There is a multiplicity of intelligence/security actors involved in processing and
exploiting data, including several, overlapping transnational intelligence networks
dominated by the US.

•	Legal regulation of communications surveillance differs across the member states
examined, however in general legal frameworks are characterised by ambiguity or
loopholes as regards large-scale communications surveillance, while national
oversight bodies lack the capacities to effectively monitor the lawfulness of
intelligence services' large scale interception of data.

This empirical analysis furthermore underlines the two key issues remaining unclear
given the lack of information and the secretive attitude of the services involved
in these surveillance programmes: what/who are the ultimate targets of this
surveillance exercise, and how are data collected, processed, filtered and analysed?

5

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

The paper then presents modalities of action at the disposal of EU institutions to counter
unlawful large-scale surveillance (Section 3). This section underlines that even if
intelligence activities are said to remain within the scope of member states exclusive
competences in the EU legal system, this does not necessarily means that member
states' surveillance programmes are entirely outside the remits of the EU's
intervention. The ECHR, as well as the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, could here
play a significant role, especially given the fact that, from a legal point of view, EU
surveillance programmes are incompatible with minimum democratic rule of law
standards and compromise the security and fundamental human rights of citizens and
residents in the EU. The forthcoming revision of Europol's legal mandate also appears to
be a timely occasion to address the issue of EU competence and liability in sharing and
exploiting data generated by national large-scale surveillance operations and to ensure
greater accountability and oversight of this agency's actions.

The briefing paper concludes that a lack of actions of the European Parliament
would profoundly undermine the trust and confidence that EU citizens have in
the European institutions. A set of recommendations is finally outlined, suggesting
further steps to be drawn from the LIBE committee's inquiry.

6

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

INTRODUCTION

Stating the scope of the problem

As already stated by the European Parliament in July 2013, following the revelations of
Edward Snowden published by the Guardian and the Washington Post on 6 June 2013
concerning the NSA activities and the European services working with them, it appears
that:

•	First, the US authorities are accessing and processing personal data of EU citizens
on a large scale via, among others, the National Security Agency's (NSA)
warrantless wiretapping of cable-bound internet traffic (UPSTREAM)1 and direct
access to the personal data stored in the servers of US-based private companies
such as Microsoft, Yahoo, Google, Apple, Facebook or Skype2 (PRISM). This allows
the US authorities to access both stored communications as well as perform real-
time collection on targeted users, through cross-database search programmes
such as X-KEYSCORE.3 UPSTREAM, PRISM and X-KEYSCORE are only three of the
most publicised programmes, and represent the tip of the iceberg of the NSA's
surveillance.4

•	Second, the UK intelligence agency Government Communications Headquarters
(GCHQ) has cooperated with the NSA and has initiated actions of interception
under a programme code-named TEMPORA.5 Further reports have emerged
implicating a handful of other EU member states that may be running (Sweden,
France, Germany) or developing (potentially the Netherlands) their own large-
scale internet interception programmes, and collaborating with the NSA in the
exchange of data.

•	Third, EU institutions and EU Member State embassies and representations have
been subjected to US-UK surveillance and spying activities. The LIBE Committee
recently received testimonies about how the UK GCHQ infiltrated Belgacom
systems in what was codenamed 'Operation Socialist' to gain access to the data of
the European Institutions.6 A letter from Sir Jon Cunliffe, the UK ambassador to
the EU stated that the GCHQ chief would not appear (at the hearing) since 'the
activities of intelligence services are... the sole responsibility of EU member
states'.7

The questions opened by these NSA activities and the European services working with

1	The UPSTREAM programme was revealed when it was discovered that the NSA was tapping cable-
bound internet traffic in the very building of the SBC Communications in San Francisco, in 2006. See
« AT&T Whistle-Blower's Evidence », Wired, 05/17/2006. Available at http://bit.lv/17oUaIG

2	Through the NSA's programme Planning Tool for Resource Integration, Synchronisation, and
Management (PRISM).

3	The Guardian, Friday 7 June 2013 and Saturday 8 June 2013.

4	Other high-profile NSA's electronic surveillance programmes include: Boundless Informant, BULLRUN,
Fairview, Main Core, NSA Call Database, STELLARWIND.

5	This note supplements the previous research of Caspar Bowden by looking at the connection between
the European programmes and the US surveillance programme. Caspar Bowden: The US Surveillance
Programmes and Their Impact on EU Citizens' Fundamental Rights, PE 474.405, Sept. 2013

6	Spiegel journalists who had access to Snowden documents have stated in a post published on
September 20, 2013: "According to the slides in the GCHQ presentation, the attack was directed at
several Belgacom employees and involved the planting of a highly developed attack technology referred
to as a "Quantum Insert" ("QI"). It appears to be a method with which the person being targeted,
without their knowledge, is redirected to websites that then plant malware on their computers that can
then manipulate them." See www.spiegel.de/intemational/europe/british-spy-agency-gchq-hacked-
belgian-telecoms-firm-a-923406.html

7	Letter from John Cunliffe to Juan Lopez Aguilar, available at:
www.europarl.europa.eu/document/activities/cont/201310/20131003ATT72276/20131003ATT72276EN.p
df

7

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

them are therefore directly affecting the European Union institutions and they necessitate
a specific inquiry by the European parliament, given quite clearly that these matters do
indeed affect EU affairs and interact with EU competence.

Beyond the specific case of the attacks against the EU institutions, these secret
operations impact, first, the daily life of all the populations living inside the
European Union (their citizens and their permanent residents) when they use internet
services (such as email, web browsing, cloud computing, social networks or Skype
communications - via personal computers or mobile devices), by transforming them into
potential suspects. Second, these operations may also influence the fairness of the
competition between European companies and US companies, as they have been
carried out in secret and imply economic intelligence; third, some governments of the
EU were kept unaware of these activities while their citizens were subject to these
operations. An inquiry is therefore central and needs to be prolonged by further in-depth
studies, in particular in the context of the EU developments of Rule of Law.

In addition to the fact that these operations have been kept secret from the public, from
companies and branches of governments affected by them (with the possible exception
of the intelligence community of some European countries), the second characteristic
of these operations that has to be highlighted is their "large scale" dimension,
which changes their very nature, as they go largely beyond what was called before
targeted surveillance or a non-centralised and heterogeneous assemblage of forms of
surveillance8. These operations now seem to plug in intelligence capacities on these
different forms of surveillance via different platforms and may lead to data mining and
mass surveillance. The different appreciations of what is large scale surveillance are
discussed in details below.

A large part of the world's electronic communications transiting through cables or
satellites, including increasingly information stored or processed within cloud computing
services (such as Google Drive, or Dropbox for consumers; Salesforce, Amazon, Microsoft
or Oracle for businesses) i.e. petabytes of data and metadata, may become the object of
interception via technologies put in place by a transnational network of intelligence
agencies specialised in data collection and whose leader seems to be the NSA which
pertains simultaneously to different networks. The NSA carries out surveillance through
various programmes and strategic partnerships9. While the largest percentage of the
internet traffic is believed to be collected directly at the root of the communications
infrastructure, by tapping into the backbones of the telecommunications networks
distributed around the world, the recent exposure of the PRISM programme has revealed
that the remaining traffic is tapped through secret data collection and data extraction of
nine US-based companies: Microsoft, Google, Yahoo, Facebook, Paltalk, Youtube, Skype,
AOL, Apple.10 The surveillance programmes therefore imply not only governments and a
network of intelligence services, but they work through the "forced" participation of
internet providers as a hybrid system, as part of a Public-Private-Partnership (PPP)
whose consent is limited.

On the basis of the provisions of the US FISA Act, the NSA, with an annual "certification"
of the FISA court, can target any non-US citizen or non-US legal resident located outside
the territory of the US for surveillance11. These data, once intercepted, are filtered
and the suspicious ones are retained for further purposes by the NSA and GCHQ. 8 9 10 11

8	K. Haggerty and R. Ericson, (2000), The Surveillant Assemblage, British Journal of Sociology, 51(4): p.
605-622. See also Bigo, D. (2006), Intelligence Services, Police and Democratic Control: The European
and Transatlantic Collaboration, in Bigo D., Tsoukala A., Controlling Security, Paris. L'harmattan.

9	The NSA functions in particular as the center of the network codenamed "Five Eyes" (US, UK, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand. See Glenn Greenwald, Laura Poitras and Ewen MacAskill "NSA shares raw
intelligence including Americans' data with Israel", The Guardian, 11/11/2013. http://bit.lv/1gEJI84
Accessed 14/10/2013

10	See Bill Binney, "Democracy and Surveillance Technology", Congress on Privacy & Surveillance,
30/09/2013, http://slideshot.epfl.ch/events/cops Accesed 14/10/2013

11	See section 702 of the FISA Act See http://bit.ly/1gEIXf5 Accessed 14/10/2013

8

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

The stored data can then be aggregated with other data, and be searched via specifically
designed programmes such as X-KEYSCORE.

Furthermore, internet access providers in the US (but also in Europe) are under the
obligation to keep their data for a certain period, in order to give law enforcement
agencies the possibility to connect an IP adress with a specific person under
investigation. The legal obligations concerning access to data and privacy law
derogations vary for the internet providers and the intelligence services, depending on
the nationality of the persons under suspicion according to the nationality of the person
concerned.

For the European citizen using cloud computing or any internet service which
transits through the US cable communications systems (possibly all internet
traffic) this has very important consequences, on various levels:

•	At present, the scope of the US debate around PRISM has centred around the
rights of US citizen to be protected from illegitimate purposes of data collection by
the NSA and their other intelligence agencies, with a focus on the US Patriot act
and FISA reforms, but it has been discussed only for their citizens in the context
of their institutions and constitutional frameworks. The implications for EU citizens
need to be addressed too.

•	As explained in a previous note by Caspar Bowden, it is quite clear that European
citizens whose data are processed by US intelligence services are not protected in
the same way as US persons under the US Constitution in terms of guarantees
concerning their privacy.12 Consequently the data of European data subjects are
'transferred' or 'extracted' without their authorisation and knowledge, and a legal
framework offering legal remedies does not currently exist.

Under European law, the individual has the ownership of his data. This principle is central
and protected by the EU Charter and the Treaty. This aspect raises important legal issues
that will be tackled in the section 3 of this study: can we consider unauthorised access to
data as a "theft" (of correspondance)? Currently, channels permitting lawful search do
exist, such as the EU-US Mutual Legal Assistance Agreement (MLAA) that cover criminal
investigations, and counter terrorism activities. However, in light of recent revelations,
have the US services and their European Member States partners followed the rules of
this agreement? Moreover, and contrary to the US legislation, the EU Charter of
fundamental rights requires data protection and applies to everyone, not just EU citizens.
The ECHR also guarantees the right to privacy for everyone not just nationals of
contracting parties. Thus the overall framework of the right to privacy and data
protection in the EU cannot be limited to EU citizens alone. However, protections arising
from national constitutions could be also limited.

To solve this profound inequality of treatment, it would require either a change of
US laws offering the same privacy rights to any data subject intercepted by their
systems, independently of their nationality, or to sign an international treaty like the EU-
US agreements specifying a digital bill of rights concerning all data subjects, whatever
their nationality.

The structure of the study

The study starts by shedding light on the Snowden's revelations and highlights to what
extent we are witnessing a reconfiguration of surveillance that enables access to a much
larger scale of data than telecommunication surveillance of the past. "Large scale"
surveillance is at the heart of both a scientific controversy about what the different

12	C. Bowden (2013), The US Surveillance Programmes and Their Impact on EU Citizens' Fundamental
Rights, Study for the European Parliament, PE 474.405, September 2013. See the developments
concerning the fact that under FISAA section 702, non-US citizens are excluded from the scope of the
4th Amendment.

9

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

technologies of interception of digital messages can do when they are organised into
platforms and planning tools in terms of integration of data, and a political and ethical
controversy about the use of these technologies by the intelligence services; the two
controversies being interwoven by the different actors in order to compete over the
legitimacy of such practices.

These preliminary remarks are critical for the second part of the study that deals with a
comparative approach to European Programmes of surveillance. Since the publication of
the first revelations on the US PRISM programme, disclosures and allegations relating to
large-scale surveillance activities by eU member states have emerged as a result of both
the Snowden leaks and wider investigative journalism. Section 2 draws on a country-by-
country overview of large-scale telecommunications surveillance activities/capacities of
five EU member states: UK, Sweden, France, Germany and the Netherlands (set out in
Annex 1 of this study). The section draws a set of observations concerning the technical
features, modalities and targets pursued by the intelligence services of these EU member
states in harvesting large scale data, as well as examining the national and international
actors involved in this process and the cooperation between them. It highlights the
commonalities, divergences and cross-cutting features which emerge from the available
evidence and highlights gaps in current knowledge which require further investigation.

These empirical examples are followed by an investigation of modalities of actions at the
disposal of EU institutions concerning large scale surveillance (Section 3). This section
tackles the EU competences concerning NSA surveillance programmes and general
oversight over EU Member State programmes of surveillance. It assesses the relationship
between surveillance programmes and EU competence, employing three legal modalities
of action to critically examine EU surveillance programmes from an EU law viewpoint.

The study concludes with a set of recommendations targeted at the European Parliament
and aiming to feed into the overall conclusions and next steps to be drawn from the LIBE
committee's inquiry.

Methodological note

The exercise of piecing together the extent of large scale surveillance programmes
currently conducted by selected EU member states is hampered by a lack of official
information and restricted access to primary source material. The empirical evidence
gathered for the purpose of this study and presented in Annex 1 therefore relies on three
broad forms of evidence:

1.	The reports and testimonies of investigative journalists. Much of the
publicly available evidence covering EU member states' engagement in mass
surveillance-like activities stems from revelations of investigative journalists, and
their contacts with whistleblowers - current or former operatives of intelligence
agencies. Press reports are in some cases very concrete in their sources (e.g.
quoting from specific internal documents), while others are more ambiguous.
Where possible we provide as much information concerning the journalistic
sources where used in this study, however, a cautious approach must be taken to
material that researchers have not viewed first hand.

2.	The consultation and input of experts via semi-structured interviews and
questionnaires. Experts consulted for this study include leading academic
specialists whose research focuses on the surveillance activities of intelligence
agencies in their respective member states and its compatibility with national and
European legal regimes.

3.	Official documents and statements. Where possible, the study makes
reference to official reports or statements by intelligence officials and government
representatives which corroborate/counter allegations concerning large-scale
surveillance by intelligence services of EU member states.

10

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

1.	Controversy between the actors about the scale of the
problem

KEY FINDINGS

•	The PRISM scandal in the US and disclosures by Edward Snowden only serve to
recall the recurrence of transgressions and illegal practices carried out by
intelligence services.

•	Surveillance of population groups is not a new phenomenon in liberal regimes. It
is the purpose and the scale of surveillance that are precisely at the core of what
differentiates democratic regimes and police states.

•	Intelligence services have adopted several strategies in order to avoid the
accusations of privileging security over liberty.

•	There is a growing consensus that the attitude of the NSA and GCHQ, but also
other secret services in Europe, are no longer acceptable in a democratic society.

•	Therefore, the analysis of Europe surveillance programmes cannot be reduced to
the question of a balance between data protection versus national security, but
has to be framed in terms of collective freedoms and democracy

A scientific controversy, which has central implications in terms of politics and ethics in
democracy, revolves around the idea that large-scaling surveillance has to be contained.
It implies a discussion about the role of the technological developments historically and a
discussion about the use of these technologies when they are at the service of
intelligence services. These questions tackle the legitimacy of such operations, their
impact in terms of data protection, privacy and discrimination between individuals. They
also affect the question of the structure of democracy and collective freedoms. Therefore
the key question is the one of the nature, the scale, and the depth of
surveillance that can be tolerated in and between democracies.

The objective of this note is not to take side and to arbitrate who is telling the truth in
these controversies, as it is with the time constraint impossible to have a clear view of
what is knowledge and what are allegations.13

This is why it is important to take into account the methodological note set out in the
introduction outlining the limits of the knowledge accumulated and to acknowledge the
speculative part of the argument. Nevertheless, these limits, once accepted, do not
hamper the possibility for the note to propose as a main objective to find solutions that
can be accepted despite the discrepancy between these strongly opposing appreciations.

The note suggests that the controversy over large scale harvesting of data has to be
understood along a continuum of intelligence services activities: 1) counter terrorism
activities that follow a criminal justice logic, 2) counter terrorism activities that try to
monitor the future by profiling suspects, 3) cyber spying activities that target specific
groups in a military strategic approach, and 4) electronic mass surveillance activities
carried out without clear objectives.

The note thus proposes a « red line » approach that would be accepted by all
the actors involved. The actors would agree not to cross this line in the future, to fully

13	D. Omand (2008), Can we have the Pleasure of the Grin without Seeing the Cat? Must the
Effectiveness of Secret Agencies Inevitably Fade on Exposure to the Light? Intelligence and National
Security, Volume 23, Issue 5, pages 593-607, 2008.

11

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

respect democratic rules, while pursuing their mission of protection against crime and
terrorism.

1.1.	Large scale electronic surveillance in democracies:
compatibility or not?

The characteristics of large scale electronic surveillance differ in many ways from
traditional intelligence activities. This section aims at highlighting how the possibilities
opened up by the ever-increasing digitalisation of human activity redefine the scale of
surveillance, its rationale and its underlying logics.

1.1.1.	Surveillance, Intelligence services and democracy

Surveillance of groups of population is not a new phenomenon in liberal regimes. Specific
groups of individuals have often been targeted by intelligence services, because they
were suspected of conducting criminal activities (including political violence). If
democratic regimes have not gone as far as authoritarian ones, whose intelligence bodies
were spying quite systematically on their own populations in order to detect dissent in
political opinions in the name of a doctrine based on the idea of enemies within (such as
the STASI in the Former Democratic Republic of Germany, the Securitate in Romania, or
the UDBA in former Yugoslavia), they still have a history of large-scale surveillance.

The purposes and the scale of surveillance are precisely at the core of what
differentiates democratic regimes and police states. Even if there has been
transgressions in the past, intelligence services in democratic regimes in principle do not
collect data in mass, on large groups of population, and if surveillance is undertaken on
specific individuals, it is on the ground that collection of data is deemed necessary to
detect and prevent violent actions in the making, not to gather information on life styles
or political opinions. At least this has worked as a kind of 'agreement', a shared
understanding between the State and the citizens, which is well captured in this quote:

Our government in its very nature, and our open society in all its instinct, under the

Constitution and the Bill of Rights automatically outlaws intelligence organizations of

the kind that have developed in police states.14

Nevertheless, when ramparts against full surveillance are not checked regularly, they
may stop operating. In the name of the development of high technologies and their use
by 'enemies', intelligence services have crossed these boundaries in the pursuit of their
missions. This goes along a frequent redefinition of who is the enemy (or the suspect),
and how far s/he is already infiltrated into the territory, that has overstretched the notion
of national security. In a democracy, however, separation of power exists, and the
excess of intelligence services have been regularly denounced when their unlawful
activities, often concealed under a veil of secrecy that characterises intelligence-led
policing, have been uncovered.

The PRISM scandal in the US and the recent Snowden's revelation only reminds us the
recurrence of wrongdoings and illegal practices in 'targeted surveillance' carried out by
intelligence services as well as the resistance of the political authorities to recognise that
the services went too far. In the past and prior to PRISM and al.15, US authorities
have been condemned in numerous occasions for the surveillance and
infiltration of large groups of individuals by law enforcement authorities. The
civil rights movements and the communists were the targets of the 1950s, the anti-war

14	A. Dulles (1963), The Craft of Intelligence, New York: Harper&Row, p.257.

15	Even if we acknowledge that PRISM is only a small programme within the broader NSA programmes of
surveillance, and that other meaningful programmes have been revealed - such as XKeyscore, we will
keep the reference to PRISM and al. as generic to designate NSA programmes to ensure clarity.

12

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

movements in the 1960s and the 1970s. Secret programmes were in place with an
extensive use of informants, intercepted mail and phone calls, engineered break-ins16.
COINTELPRO in the late 1950s, CHAOS and MINARET in the 1960s and the 1970s were
all recognised as unlawful surveillance programmes and specific rules have been
elaborated to protect US persons from this political surveillance.

The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) court was specifically designed in 1978
to counterbalance the intelligence powers and to give the judiciary the power to oversee
claimed "foreign intelligence" activities, especially if they were affecting fundamental
rights of US citizen. As detailed elsewhere, this court has constantly seen its powers
undermined, even more so after 9/11 and the launch of the war on terror17. The court's
scope is also limited to the protection of US citizen, and does not include non-US persons
even though the latter are also the victims of unlawful surveillance. The current PRISM
and other NSA activities and their relations to other intelligence services and private
companies in the US further illustrates the limitations of powers of the judiciary over
intelligence activities, as well as the difficulty to implement a parliamentary oversight
over such activities, including the participation of private actors having a global reach in
surveillance.

In Europe, a series of scandals emerged when practices of undercover policing
and surveillance of political parties were endangering civil liberties, but they
were more connected with infiltrations and undercover operations than mass
surveillance. In Spain the creation of the GAL (Grupos Antiterroristas de Liberación) to
fight ETA ended up, after many years of procedure, with the condemnation of the former
Minister of Interior and its imprisonment in 1996. In France, the Renseignements
Généraux were threatened to be shut down after a series of illegal activities involving
illegal phone-taps and the presumed assassination of a gay activist in the 1990s, the
Pasteur Doucé. More recently, in June 2013, Luxembourg's Prime Minister Juncker
officially announced he would resign following a spying scandal, involving illegally
bugging politicians.

The need for an oversight of intelligence activities by parliamentary or judicial
authorities has progressively been widely accepted by the late 1990s, of course
not without difficulties. French intelligence services only recently agreed to an external
procedure of control. The Renseignements Généraux have partly survived under the
DCRI, but their missions have been re-oriented. These services always insisted that they
either focused on very specific cases connected with spying or political violence, or that
they were only undertaking better « opinion polls » than the researchers and private
companies providing similar « services ». As detailed hereafter, the specificity of large-
scale surveillance considerably challenges these supposedly reassuring statements and
raises the question of the connections between the services in charge of antiterrorism
and the services in charge of collecting data for large-scale surveillance.

The War on Terror launched after the events of 9/11 somehow shook the fragile
consensus according to which democracies do not carry out mass surveillance
and have to accept some oversight. In the US, and to a lesser degree in Europe, a
series of programmes have been initiated, in secret, using all existing resources of
modern information technology. The possibilities of surveillance have increased at the
same pace of the increase of data availability. Regular increase in bandwith has enabled
new uses of the Internet, such as mass storage and processing of personal, private and
governmental data through cloud computing. The development of mobile computing
devices (smartphones, tablets) has similarly provided a new wealth of geo-localised,
personal information.

16	See G. T.Marx (1989), Undercover: Police Surveillance In America, University Of California Press.

17	On FISA loopholes and the court limitations, see the note produced for the LIBE Committee: Caspar
Bowden, The US Surveillance Programmes and Their Impact on EU Citizens' Fundamental Rights, PE
474.405, Sept. 2013

13

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

Each time a scandal occurs, as in the Swift and TFTP related scandals and their EU-US
repercussions18, the demand for an oversight of intelligence activities by parliamentary
and/or judicial authorities gains more legitimacy. Clearly the modalities of oversight
remain challenging, and their implementation highly problematic, because surveillance
programmes are often transnational and have a global reach, but also because of the
ability of these services to surround their activities with a veil of secrecy (the 'classified
information' argument). The alleged difficulty to draw the line between the interests of
the State, those of a specific government or of a specific political group (when these are
not purely private interests) only adds to the current problem19. In addition, when the
programmes are using a world wide surveillance on citizens of other states, without the
knowledge of these citizens, and even sometimes without the knowledge of their
governments, the question is not anymore one of data protection and privacy of an
individual versus this surveillance, it becomes a question of democracy itself where
systematic surveillance of a "mass" of people may undermine the regime, while arguing
it is for protection (see section 3).

1.1.2.	Large scale surveillance and mass surveillance: what is at stake?

This note insists on the difference that exists between the scale and depth of the
programmes that are connected to PRISM and al. and the programmes previously
undertaken in counterterrorism and counterspying. What has to be questionned here is
the possible transformation of large scale surveillance into what can be called a 'cyber
mass surveillance' that enables access without warrant to a much larger scale
of data than telecommunication surveillance of the past, such as ECHELON.

Ironically, it was the European Parliament's inquiries about NSA's ECHELON programme
in 2000 and 2001 that already revealed that surveillance programmes capable of
interception and content inspection of telephone calls, fax, e-mail and other data traffic
globally through the interception of communication bearers including satellite
transmission were in place.20 As reported to the European Parliament by the then
whistle-blower Duncan Campbell, ECHELON was one part of a global surveillance systems
involving cooperation of satellites stations run by Britain, Canada, Australia and New
Zealand,21 and concern aroused in particular by the assertion in Campbell's report that
ECHELON had moved away from its original purpose of defence against the Eastern Bloc
and was being used for purposes of industrial espionage.22

Other US programmes that were denounced by watchdogs can be mentioned, such as
CAPPS I & II (Computer Assisted Passenger Pre-Screening System) and US-Visit related

18	A. Amicelle (2011), The Great (Data) Bank Robbery: Terrorist Finance Tracking Program and the
"SWIFT Affair", Research Question 36, CERI, Sciences-Po.

19	See P. Gill (2012), 'Intelligence, Threat, Risk and the Challenge of Oversight', Intelligence and National
Security, 27:2, pp. 206-22; see also A. Wills, M. Vermeulen, H. Born, M. Scheinin, M. Wiebusch, A.
Thornton (2011), Parliamentary Oversight of Security and Intelligence Agencies in the EU, Note for the
European Parliament, PE 453.207, 15 June 2011.

20	On ECHELON, see European Parliament (2001), Report on the existence of a global system for the
interception of private and commercial communications (ECHELON interception system)
(2001/2098(INI)), PE 305.391 A5-0264/2001. See resolutions on the right to privacy and data
protection, in particular that of 5 September 2001 on the existence of a global system for the
interception of private and commercial communications (Echelon interception system OJ C 72 E,
21.3.2002, p. 221.

21	Duncan Campbell, 'Inside Echelon: the history, structure, and function of the global surveillance
system known as Echelon', Telepolis (2000): www.heise.de/tp/artikel/6/6929/1.html: Duncan Campbell,
The state of the art in Communications Intelligence (COMINT) of automated processing for intelligence
purposes of intercepted broadband multi-language leased or common carrier systems and its applicability
to COMINT targeting and selection, including speech recognition, Part 2/5, in: STOA (Ed.), Development
of Surveillance Technology and Risk of Abuse of Economic Information (October 1999), PE 168.184.

22	See Final Report on the existence of a global system for the interception of private and commercial
communications (ECHELON interception system) (2001/2098(INI)), PE.305.391

14

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

PNR records, which gather personal information from unidentified government databases
as well as commercial data sources to set up no fly and terrorist watch lists; NIMD (Novel
Intelligence from Massive Data), an initiative of the secretive Intelligence Community
Advanced Research and Development Activity (ARDA) which focuses on "massive data";
MATRIX (Multistate Anti-Terrorism Information Exchange), a state-level program
supported by the U.S. Department of Justice. MATRIX aims to give state law enforcement
agencies across the nation a powerful new tool for analysing the personal records of both
criminals and ordinary Americans. According to an article published in the Washington
Post, the programme "would let authorities (...) instantly find the name and address of
every brown-haired owner of a red Ford pickup truck in a 20-mile radius of a suspicious
event".23

This reminder of such surveillance programmes and the intelligence activities they
authorised sheds a particular light over the current Snowden's revelation. Two main
aspects should be here underlined: PRISM and al. should not be considered as a
rupture from the past (even though their magnitude is quite unique), nor as an
isolated initiative as many other parts of the world develop similar programmes, as
described in Section 2.

A series of programmes have been initiated, using all existing resources of the Internet,
both in the US and in Europe, after 2004 with the development of integrated platforms,
the breaking of software encryption keys, the development of new software permitting
routinely to filter, visualise and correlate unprecedented amounts of data and metadata.
These new resources for surveillance, the widespread use of smart phones and
the development of cloud computing have blurred the line between 'targeted
surveillance' - justified by the fight against crime - and data mining, which
carries the risk of extending the scale, and the purpose, of surveillance. These
programmes have been justified by the will to protect the population from crimes, and
were tailored to provide tools for the profiling of categories of people likely to commit
such crimes. However, once data are available to search and extraction, other purposes
may arise.

One such attempt, the "Total Information Awareness" (TIA) programme, has been
precisely rejected by the US Congress on this ground in 2003 and (at least publicly)
limited to Terrorism Information Awareness. Yet the idea of warrantless wiretapping has
been accepted at that time, as well as blanket data searches. Revealed in 2005 by the
New York Times, this programme has been strongly denounced. However, this
programme did not disappear, and was de facto legalised in 2007 by the Protect America
Act.

This raises a number of questions: how far do « PRISM » in the US and « Tempora » in
the UK follow or not the same logic of TIA? Do they maintain a purpose limited to
terrorism and crime or are the data used also for tax evasion, for advantaging some
private companies in their contracts, for profiling political opinion of groups considered as
marginals, for elaborating scenarios concerning political conflicts and international
situations?

Concerns increasingly arise that these programmes are in addition interconnected and
that some European Member States services participate to these data extractions of the
Internet data for multipurposes "explorations". Snowden indeed claimed that data
collected by the Tempora programme is shared with the NSA and that no distinction is
made in the gathering of data between private citizens and targeted suspects24. But

23	"U.S. Backs Florida's New Counterterrorism Database: 'Matrix' Offers Law Agencies Faster Access to
Americans' Personal Records" The Center for Investigative Rerporting, 05/08/2013 http://bit.lv/lgEOGBR
Accessed 04/10/2013

24	Ewen MacAskill, Julian Borger, Nick Hopkins, Nick Davies and James Ball "GCHQ Taps Fibre-Optic
Cables For Secret Access To World's Communications" The Guardian, 21/06/2013

15

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

GCHQ has strongly insisted that they were not using data for indiscriminate searches25,
and that this use was restricted for national security, detection and prevention of crime
purposes. One may ask: where is the "red line" that intelligence services in
democratic regimes cannot cross when they use cyber surveillance and, if a
"red line" is recognised, is it shared by the US and the EU?

1.2.	Political and ethical controversies regarding the use of these
technologies by intelligence services: the question of

legitimacy

1.2.1. The position of the security services

Intelligence services have adopted several strategies in order to avoid the accusations of
priviledging security over liberty and threatening the nature of democratic regimes:

•	Some security services have insisted that they had followed specific protocols,
with the full knowledge of their other European partners. They have argued that
surveillance has been strictly limited to counter-terrorism operations, and that
surveillance took place on a small scale. When they do accept that they run large
scale surveillance programmes, they insist they use data only to confirm
information they already have, and that this surveillance only targets small
groups of individuals or IP addresses. Therefore, according to them, this can not
be assimilated to data mining.

•	Other services or other persons in the same services have considered that they
were not carrying out counter-terrorism operations, but cyber-security, cyber-
defense and that they have the right to do such activities beyond the scope of the
MLAA, that they have their own right to define what were the boundaries of their
national security, and that they were not constrained by any international
agreement26. They have also considered that these activities are not a lack of
compliance with the article 4.3 of the Treaty of the EU concerning the loyalty of
the MS to the principles of the EU Charter, and that they were fully covered by the
article reserving the intelligence activities to the member states only. In their
views, impunity does prevail.

Security services and several academics working on intelligence often refer to the fact
that open societies also have enemies, including internal enemies, and that the secret
services have been set up to act beyond the legal framework, not to be prisoner of it.
They consider that only their own government, and often only the president or the prime
minister, has the right to know what they do. They also deny the fact that the
International or European Courts may have a say on this matter. It is a strong
professional habit and a discourse largely shared by different US and European services,
especially the ones which are not often in touch with the judiciary. This attitude and the
series of beliefs it imply is certainly at the heart of the general problem of the different
appreciation in terms of legitimacy of what has been revealed by Snowden on PRISM.

25	Tempora is considered as a "buffer" which keeps the Internet data passing through the cable for a
couple of days, in order to give more time to the teams who search suspects to have a "line" of
conversation. They extract data from the cable to find IP locations and emails associated, but they do not
retain the data in mass or use them for general profiling.

26	General Keith Alexander, director of the NSA and Chief of the Central Security Service (CHCSS) as well
as Commander of the United States Cyber Command, has made the link between the new project of
cyber defense that he defended on 12 March 2013 at the Congress and the Snowden "leak" which
undermines in his view the capacity of answer of the US versus foreign nations attacks on cyber.

16

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

1.2.2.	The position of the other actors

Clearly, not all branches of government accept the attitude of the secret services.
The considerations of a government tied by the Rule of Law differ from one country to
another one. Some have a more "permissive" legal environment than others. Most, but in
practice not all, governments of the EU considered that they have to respect the
decisions of the European Courts (ECJ and ECHR) concerning the right to life, torture, or
data protection and privacy even when they limit their so-called "freedom of action". The
US do not seem ready to accept any constraint of that sort if the principles do not exist in
their own constitution.

In the case of the PRISM affair, and previously in the case of TFTP, Commissioner Reding
has written a letter to the US Attorney General, Eric Holder, raising European concerns
and asking for clarification and explanations regarding PRISM and other such
programmes involving data collection and searching, and the laws under which such
programmes may be authorised. A detailed answer from the US authorities is still
pending months after the events, despite the discussions which took place at the EU-US
Justice Ministerial meeting in Dublin on 14 June 2013.

Some lawyers, civil servants, NGOs and journalists have considered that these
permanent delays in terms of answers, and the silence of the intelligence services in the
matter, further legitimate the need to undertake urgent action against the double
standards that the US government imposes on its partners. They consider that the US
government maintains the fiction of a global collaboration against crime and terrorism
while applying a strategy of full spectrum dominance, which is more and more agressive
and they consider their technological advance as a strategic advantage against their
allies. In this case, the image of a community of nations is clearly undermined in favour
of a revival of national struggles for dominance and a clash of sovereignties. This
reformulation affects the US-EU relations, but also the internal relations between
member states in the EU. As we will see in section 3, respect of other's sovereignty is
one of the key questions emerging from the PRISM affair and other programmes carried
out by European services, inside Europe and in the context of transatlantic collaboration.

In this context, a lack of actions of the European Parliament would profoundly
undermines the trust and confidence that EU citizens have in the European
institutions, and especially in the European Parliament to safeguard and protect the most
fundamental freedoms related to their private and family lives.

Actors of civil societies, especially journalists of the most well respected newpapers in the
world, and human right NGOs consider that the attitude of the NSA and GCHQ, but also
other secret services in Europe, are not any more acceptable. In the case of the GCHQ in
the UK, civil society actors consider that their actions could be labelled as acts of
cyber warfare agression, as form of treason of European member states'
services spying on other EU citizens on the behalf of their US counterparts, and that if it
is not a treason per se, it is a breach of trust and confidence in terms of solidarity with
the EU, by placing other alliegeances with third parties against the EU ones.

Other European secret services have also to be watched. They may not be connected
directly with the transnational network of the NSA, but they may try to build their own
apparatus. France and Germany have developed at a smaller scale some equivalent
capabilities and reportedly access transnational electronic communications without a
regular warrant but on the basis of special courts, as well as they share data with other
countries. These aspects are further developed in Section 2.

The reaction of a part of the civil society has been stronger than the political reactions
that always tend to minimise the possible transatlantic rift. Most of the newspapers
(especially in the comments left by readers) and internet blogs have spoken favourably
in favour of Snowden and other wistleblowers, and they have developed an anxiety
concerning the rise of surveillance which is often mixing facts and fears concerning a
totalitarian future, with references to Georges Orwell, Philip K Dick, or an easy reading of
Michel Foucault. These reactions are for the moment concentrated on the infosphere of

17

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

Internet bloggers, but after the arrestation of David Miranda, the partner of the journalist
Glenn Greenwald of the Guardian by GCHQ, a large part of the world's journalists of
investigations have started to share the image of a "state of exception" in the making, or
of a "surveillance state".27 Journalists and human rights NGOs have joined the more
marginal scenes of the infosphere in favour of freedom of the Internet. Many activists
consider that the easyness of technologies of surveillance cannot be a justification for
their use and some of them regularly use the formula that we are "sleepwalking into a
surveillance state". Joined by an increasing number of persons, they refuse to accept
such a disproportion between the massive collection of data and metadata, the length of
their retention in regards to the so-called objective of preventing terrorism, which has
become a blanket excuse for mass data collection used for many other purposes.

For the above mentioned reasons, an analysis of Europe surveillance programmes cannot
be reduced only to the question of a balance between data protection versus
national security and to a technical question to be resolved by experts, but has
to be framed also in terms of collective freedoms and nature of the democratic
regime.

If derogations to data protection may exist, national security cannot be a justification for
a structural transformation of rule of law and democratic expressions of civil societies in
an open world of information.

If future inquiries show that most of the actions undertaken by the NSA, GCHQ and other
European services - in collaboration or in competition between them but using the same
practices - have not only focused on counter terror activities, but on economic
espionage, illegal bugging of political leaders and EU institutions, and possibly on data
mining for purposes of total information awareness, as well as on manipulation of opinion
and strategies to influence life styles and consumption habits, then the responsibility of
these services and their governments has to be dealt with from a judicial perspective.
Even if future research may show that the different EU member states' intelligence
services have restricted their activities to counter-terrorism and not mass surveillance,
this does not prevent the need for principles of necessity and proportionality.

In this context, we will try to answer the different key questions in the following sections:

•	In the different surveillance programmes in place in Europe, which ones are based
on similar logics as the NSA's? Which ones involve forms of cooperation with the
NSA?

•	How does this affect the idea of a European Union in solidarity in terms of Foreign
Affairs but also in terms of shared Fundamental Rights equally available for all its
citizens?

•	If the question of the use of technologies of surveillance is a political one, then
who should address it: the EU Member States, or all the institutions within the EU
that are involved in the protection of the open nature of the societies composing
the population of Europe?

27 Edwy Plenel, "Contre l'Etat d'exception" Mediapart, 10/08/2013 http://bit.lv/lgETpDB Accessed
14/10/2013.

18

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

2.	The EU member states practices in the context of the
revelations of NSA large scale operations

KEY FINDINGS

•	The overview of publicly available knowledge on large-scale surveillance activities
by five EU member states - the UK, Sweden, France, Germany and the
Netherlands - reveal evidence of engagement in the large-scale interception and
processing of communications data by four of those member states. Further
investigation and research is required in order to gain a better understanding of
the techniques, capacities and lawfulness of these programmes.

•	Practices of so-called 'upstreaming' (tapping directly into the communications
infrastructure as a means to intercept data) characterise the surveillance
programmes of all the selected EU member states, with the exception of the
Netherlands for whom there is no concrete evidence of engagement in large-scale
surveillance.

•	The capacities of Sweden, France and Germany (in terms of budget and human
resources) are low compared to the magnitude of the operations launched by
GCHQ and the NSA and cannot be considered on the same scale.

•	There is a multiplicity of intelligence/security actors involved in processing and
exploiting data, including several, overlapping transnational intelligence networks
dominated by the US.

•	Legal regulation of communications surveillance differs across the member states
examined, however in general legal frameworks are characterised by ambiguity or
loopholes as regards large-scale communications surveillance, while national
oversight bodies lack the capacities to effectively monitor the lawfulness of
intelligence services' large scale interception of data.

The following section draws on the evidence presented in Annex 1 on potential practices
of large-scale surveillance being conducted by the intelligence services of EU member
states. Annex 1 selects for in-depth assessment five countries where existing evidence
(drawn from investigative journalism, academic analysis or official documentation)
indicates large-scale electronic surveillance practices which may be classified as mass
surveillance: the UK, Sweden, France, Germany and (potentially in the future) the
Netherlands.

Disclosures since June 2013 surrounding the activities of the UK's GCHQ indicate a
range of programmes and projects linked to the mass interception, storage and
processing of telecommunications data, at the core of which is the so-called 'Tempora'
programme (see Section 1, Annex 1). These revelations were followed in September
2013 by reports focusing on the activities of Sweden's National Defense Radio
Establishment (FRA). Operations and programmes for the mass collection of data by
the FRA are reportedly elevating this agency to an increasingly important partner of the
global intelligence network (Section 2, Annex 1). Evidence has simultaneously emerged
concerning similar projects for the large-scale interception of telecommunications data by
both France's General Directorate for External Security (DGSE) (Section 3, Annex
1) and Germany's Federal Intelligence Service (BDE) (Section 4, Annex 1.) There
are strong suggestions to indicate that several if not all of these member states are
engaging in exchanging this intercepted data with foreign intelligence services, namely
the NSA. In addition, other EU member states are currently in the process of expanding

19

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

their signals intelligence capabilities, with the Netherlands' establishment of a new
Joint Sigint Cyber Unit (JSCU) (Section 5, Annex 1.) providing a prime example.

Each of these five member states is examined considering the following criteria: the basic
technical features of large-scale surveillance programmes; stated purpose of
programmes, targets and types of data collected; actors involved in collection and use,
including evidence of cooperation with the private sector; cooperation or exchange of
data with foreign intelligence services, including the NSA; legal framework and oversight
governing the execution of the programme(s). On the basis of these criteria, do
surveillance programmes run by EU member states share commonalities with those
executed by the NSA? How do they compare in terms of scale, technical features and the
degree of accountability and oversight characterising their implementation? The member
state by member state overview in Annex 1 reveals the following shared features/points
of diversion and cross-cutting issues:

2.1.	Technical features

According to the reports and evidence presented in Annex 1 concerning the means of
gathering mass telecommunications data, the practice of so-called 'upstreaming' -
tapping directly into the communications infrastructure as a means to intercept data -
appears to be a relatively widespread feature of surveillance by several EU member
states, namely the UK, Sweden, France and Germany. Disclosures by the Guardian in
July on GCHQ's so-called 'Tempora' programme allege that the UK intelligence service
have placed interceptors on approximately 200 undersea fibreoptic cables which arrive at
the South-West coast of Britain.28 These revelations have been followed in September by
a renewed focus on the activities of Sweden's FRA, which has seen intermittent reports
over the last five years concerning the interception and storage of communications data
from fibre-optic cables crossing Swedish borders from the Baltic sea.29 The last three
months have also seen reports citing France and Germany as relying on upstreaming
methods as a means to gather bulk data.30 This method of interception is believed to be
a relatively recent addition to the surveillance arsenal of these member states'
intelligence services, with most programmes dating from around the late 2000s (see
Annex 1). They therefore are understood to complement the more established satellite
interception programmes pursued by US and EU intelligence services (UK, Sweden,
France) of which the most extensive is 'FORNSAT', the successor of the ECHELON
programme, as the main networked foreign satellite collection system coordinated by
Five Eyes (see section 2.5 below).31

At the same time, there is little evidence (with the exception of reports concerning
Germany)32 that the intelligence services of EU member states are currently engaged in
collecting data directly from the servers of private companies, as employed in the NSA's
PRISM Programme. For the moment at least, this practice appears to be restricted to the
US. However, given the secrecy surrounding intelligence services activities, and the
allegations concerning cooperation between Germany's BND and private internet service
providers, it would require further in-depth investigation to draw any firm conclusions.

28	E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'GCHQ taps fibre-optic cables for secret access to world's communications',
The Guardian, 21 June 2013.

29	N. Nielsen (2013), 'EU asks for answers on UK snooping programme', EU Observer, 26 June 2013.

30	J. Follorou and F. Johannes (2013), 'Révélations sur le Big Brother français,' Le Monde, 4 July 2013;
Spiegel Online (2013) '100-Millionen-Programm: BND will Internet-Überwachung massiv ausweiten', 16
June 2013.

31	Statement by Duncan Campbell at the European Parliament's LIBE Committee Inquiry on Inquiry on
Electronic Mass Surveillance of EU Citizens, 1st Hearing, 5 September 2013.

32	P. Beuth (2013) 'Wie der BND das Netz überwacht', Zeit Online, 18 June 2013.

20

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Figure 1. Map showing concentration of global submarine cables

Source : http://www.submarinecablemap.com/

2.2.	Scale

Given the scarcity of information concerning the programmes detected, and particularly
the programmes by EU member states, it is difficult to draw firm conclusions concerning
the relative scale of these practices. Nevertheless, a clear distinction can be made
between the US/UK mass interception and data analysis programmes (such as PRISM,
Upstream and Tempora) and the surveillance practices by other EU intelligence services.
In terms of budgetary allocation, human resources and quantity of data collected and
analysed, it appears unlikely that the programmes of EU member states such as Sweden,
France and Germany come close to the sheer magnitude of the operations launched by
GCHQ and the NSA.

First the capacities of the aforementioned EU member state intelligence services are
relatively limited, with annual budgets of around half a billion euro33 (see Annex 1) as
opposed to the 10 billion dollar annual budget of the NSA.34 The PRiSm programme is
relatively low cost (an estimated 20 million dollars), because much of the financial
burden of data collection and processing is on the companies themselves (Apple, Google,
Facebook etc.). Nevertheless, there is evidence that the NSA makes a substantial
budgetary outlay on electronic large-scale surveillance, for instance spending 250 million
dollars a year on programmes to circumvent encryption technologies.35 GCHQ meanwhile
is reported to have invested approximately one billion pounds (1.2 billion euro) in its
'Mastering the Internet' project, which allegedly provides the overarching framework for
Tempora as well as several other telecommunications surveillance programmes (see
Annex 1).36

33	Both Germany's BND and Sweden's FRA were allocated annual budgets of approximately 500 million
euro in 2012. GCHQ's annual budget is reported to be approximately 1 billon euro. See Annex 1.

34	B. Gellman and G. Miller (2013), 'U.S. spy network's successes, failures and objectives detailed in
'black budget' summary', Washington Post, 29 August 2013: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
srv/special/national/black-budget/

35	J. Ball, J. Borger and G. Greenwald (2013), 'Revealed: how US and UK spy agencies defeat internet
privacy and security,' The Guardian, 6 September 2013.

http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/05/nsa-gcha-encrvption-codes-securitv

36	D. Leppard and C. Williams (2009), 'Jacqui Smith's secret plan to carry on snooping', The Sunday
Times, 3 May 2009.

21

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

We can also infer from the relatively low staffing capacities of the key EU intelligence
services under scrutiny (generally in the low thousands as opposed to the NSA's 30,000-
40,000 employees37 - see Annex 1) that the surveillace practices undertaken by these
member states are relatively modest. The processing and analysis of mass data requires
a significant human resources investment, as indicated by reports that the NSA has
allocated 850,000 of its operatives and external contractors to process the data captured
by surveillance activities (including data intercepted and shared by GCHQ).38 However,
this observation raises several further questions, if we consider reports of growing
technical capacities of intelligence services of EU member states such as Sweden and
France for gathering bulk data (e.g. from upstream interception techniques): without the
organisational capacity to process mass data, how is this data handled, is it for purposes
of internal processing or exchange with foreign intelligence services?

2.3.	Data types and data targets

Commonalities can be traced in the types of data targeted by programmes pursued by
both the NSA and EU member states' intelligence services. As in the case of the NSA, the
UK and Sweden collect both metadata and content, with the storage and handling of data
differentiated depending on whether it consists of metadata or content.39 In France,
reports only allude to the collection of metadata while in Germany information pertaining
to the type of data collected is unavailable.

In certain EU member states (UK, Sweden, Germany) programmes nominally target so-
called 'external communications.'40 Hence, the official targets of surveillance programmes
are those communications which take place outside the territory of the member state in
question (but which are routed through the national communications infrastructure) or
that take place between a resident of that member state and a foreign contact. This is a
consequence of national legal regimes which limit or place more stringent safeguards on
the monitoring of internal communications. As a consequence, parallels can be drawn
with the discriminatory approach taken by the NSA under FISA in only targeting those
communications by non-US nationals as they pass through communications
infrastructure on US territory. However, although the UK, Swedish and German large
scale surveillance programmes in principal intend to intercept only external
communications, in practice interception is likely to be less discriminate given that
internal communications are often routed outside a member states' territory. As a
consequence, all users of telecommunications (email, phone, social media etc.) may
potentially fall victim to having their communications data intercepted. What is currently
not clear is whether the internal communications that are unintentionally intercepted are
systematically disregarded or whether they are (illegally) retained and processed by
intelligence services.

The lack of information on how data is analysed and processed once collected makes it
difficult to shed light on the ultimate targets of this surveillance exercise. A common
feature of the surveillance programmes identified in the EU and that of the NSA's
programmes is the lack of clearly delineated set of objectives, or grounds justifying the
resort to electronic surveillance. There is no evidence across the member states selected
for examination that surveillance programmes are restricted to counter-terrorist

37	M. Rosenbach (2013), 'Prism Exposed: Data Surveillance with Global Implications' Der Spiegel, 10

June 2013 :	http://www.spieael.de/international/world/prism-leak-inside-the-controversial-us-data-

surveillance-proaram-a-904761-2.html:	NSA (2012)	'60 Years of Defending our Nation':

http://www.nsa.aov/about/cryptoloaic heritaae/60th/book/NSA 60th Anniversary.pdf.

38	E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'GCHQ taps fibre-optic cables for secret access to world's communications',
The Guardian, 21 June 2013.

39	See Annex 1 (Sections 1 and 2).

40	See Annex 1 (Sections 1, 2 and 4).

22

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

operations or countering external (military) threats. Rather, it appears from the available
evidence that the ultimate data subjects targeted by these programmes are broad. For
instance, the UK's GCHQ identify that the targets of its programmes "boil down to
diplomatic/military/commercial targets/terrorists/organised criminals and e-crime/cyber
actors."41

2.4.	Processing and analysis of data

The scale of the big data collected from upstream interception requires establishing
systematic methods, techniques and infrastructure to filter such large flows of
information. Electronic large-scale surveillance implies data extraction, data comparison,
data retention and the use of a great variety of databases. Concrete and detailed
information shedding light on how data collected via the programmes discussed in Annex
1 are processed, filtered and analysed is currently unavailable, although hints as to the
methods used to filter metadata and content are cited in reports and expert statements
(see Annex 1).

These include the use of so-called 'Massive Volume Reduction' employed by the UK's
GCHQ to reduce bulk data by removing 30% of less intelligence relevant data such as
peer-to-peer downloads ('high volume, low value traffic').42 Reports with regard to UK
and German programmes also cite the use of 'selectors' (e.g. keywords, email addresses,
phone numbers of targeted individuals) to search data.43 These 'selectors', allegedly
allow intelligence services to access the content of an individual's communications,
gather information about anyone that individual communicates with, and track locations
online and offline, in turn permitting intelligence services to create sophisticated graphs
of targets' social networks, associates, locations and movements.44

However, the lack of further detail leaves an important gap in our understanding of the
practices intelligence services are engaging to exploit the bulk data collected. These
details would be critical to determine operational legitimacy and interaction with national
legal frameworks regulating surveillance (see 2.6 below). For instance, must operatives
first register an authorised initial target before launching a search or do they have a wide
margin of manoeuvre when searching data? Do intelligence services engage in statistical
analysis of the data gathered, and if so, based on which criteria? Are private companies
engaged to collaborate in the engineering and design of algorithms and specific software
that enable to compile and classify specific trends, patterns and profiles? More
information as regards these questions would be essential to establish to what degree
the exploitation of bulk data manifests characteristics of data profiling and data mining,
which has so far been vigorously denied by intelligence service officials.45

41	E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'Mastering the internet: how GCHQ set out to spy on the world wide web,'
The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/iun/21/gcha-mastering-the-internet

42	E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'GCHQ taps fibre-optic cables for secret access to world's communications',
The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/iun/21/gcha-cables-secret-world-
communications-nsa.

43	E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'GCHQ taps fibre-optic cables for secret access to world's communications',
The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/iun/21/gcha-cables-secret-world-
communications-nsa; Spiegel Online (2013) '100-Millionen-Programm: BND will Internet-Überwachung
massiv ausweiten', 16 June 2013, available at www.spiegel.de/politik/deutschland/internet-
ueberwachung-bnd-will-100-millionen-investieren-a-905938.html

44	J. Risen and L. Poitras (2013), 'N.S.A. Gathers Data on Social Connections of U.S. Citizens,' New York
Times, 28 September 2013: http://mobile.nytimes.com/2013/09/29/us/nsa-examines-social-networks-
of-us-citizens.html.

45	For instance, US Director of National Intelligence, Washington DC, June 8, 2013: Facts on the
Collection of Intelligence Pursuant to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.

23

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

What is clear however is that data appears to serve 'multi-purpose' ends. This can be
inferred from the multiplicity of actors engaged in using data from European surveillance
programmes once processed and filtered (see below).

2.5.	Cooperation between national and international security
actors

A cross-cutting feature of the surveillance programmes examined is the multiplicity of
intelligence/security actors involved in processing and exploiting data. For instance, in
Germany and France, the evidence indicates that large scale surveillance programmes
constitute intelligence platforms that feed multi-level exchange of data between national
law enforcement and security bodies.46 Intelligence reports drawn from Sweden's
surveillance programme also feed at least eight different 'customer' organisations
ranging from defence agencies to law enforcement and customs bodies.47 The wide
spread of organisations with access to metadata or as recipients of intelligence drawn
from this data again reflects the indication that data is being used for a wide range of
security purposes far beyond the narrow focus of counter-terrorism and defence which
has traditionally formed the primary focus of national intelligence activities.

Cooperation with foreign intelligence services also appears to be a common feature of the
member states programmes outlined in Annex 1. In certain cases there are
reports/allegations of large scale data exchange with the NSA (UK, Sweden and
Germany). Cooperation with the US also appears to extend to collaboration/sharing of
research to advance the technological means of mass surveillance. This may provide a
partial explanation for why several of these mass surveillance programmes appear to
date from around the same time period (mid-late 2000s).

Disentangling cooperative relationships between different EU and US intelligence services
indicates a complex web of multiple, overlapping networks. First among these networks
is the above-mentioned Five Eyes (composed of the US, UK, Canada, Australia and New
Zealand) that originated from a 1946 multilateral agreement for cooperation in signals
intelligence,48 and which has extended over time in terms of activities (Echelon, and now
Fornsat) and in terms of privileged partners. Sweden is one of these new partners which,
according to Duncan Campbell, now permits Five Eyes to gain access to fibre optic cables
from the baltic states and Russia.49 In addition, the US also engages in cooperative
relationships with 'second' and 'third tier' partners such as France and Germany.50 With
these partners they engage in more ad hoc collaborations, but also offensive espionage,
as reflected in the recent disclosures from the NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden
published in Le Monde which suggests that the NSA had been intercepting French phone
traffic "a massive scale".51 The latter revelation provides an illustrative example of dual
networks between intelligence services, one collaborative, one aggressive, and raises the
question over whether the EU member state government concerned (in this case France)
has full oversight and awareness of what the various transnational intelligence networks
in which its services participate are doing. Overall, the picture emerges of a US which

46	See Annex 1 (Sections 3 and 4).

47	See Annex 1 (Sections 2).

48	This agreement, known as the UKUSA Agreement, was declassified in 2010 and is now publicly
available on the NSA's website: www.nsa.gov/public info/declass/ukusa.shtml

49	Statement by Duncan Campbell at the European Parliament's LIBE Committee Inquiry on Inquiry on
Electronic Mass Surveillance of EU Citizens, 1st Hearing, 5 September 2013.

50	Ibid.

51	Le Monde reported that more than 70 million French phone calls had been recorded in one 30-day
period in late 2012. See J. Follorou and G. Greenwald (2013), 'France in the NSA's crosshair : phone
networks under surveillance,' Le Monde, 21 October 2013.

24

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

effectively dominates the diplomacy of surveillance, in ways that disrupt the cohesion of
the EU in the security field.

2.6.	Legal regimes and oversight

The legal regulation of communications surveillance differs across the five EU member
states examined, and there is significant variation as regards the strength of oversight
intelligence agencies are subject to when intercepting telecommunications data.

Some legal regimes operate on the basis of orders issued by special courts (Sweden),
others on the basis of warrants issued by the government (UK, Netherlands) or by an
authorising role accorded to specially appointed oversight bodies (Germany, France,
Netherlands). However, as in the US where the loopholes of the existing regulations were
denounced prior to the PRISM scandal, there is often a lack of legal clarity in member
states' legislative frameworks where collection of mass internet data is concerned. Thus
for instance, the UK Parliament's Intelligence and Security Committee concluded
following an investigation into GCHQ activities under the PRISM programme that while
"GCHQ has not circumvented or attempted to circumvent UK law, it is proper to consider
further whether the current statutory framework governing access to private
communications remains adequate". In particular the Committee underlines that "in
some areas the legislation is expressed in general terms".52

The implementation of programmes for interception via 'up-streaming' by EU member
states indicate that law-making has not kept pace with the technological developments
seen in surveillance practices in recent years, often designed for traditional intelligence
techniques such as wiretapping, rather than the mass 'dragnet' approach that appears to
be increasingly adopted by US and EU intelligence agencies. Thus in France, a senior
representative of the intelligence services is reported to claim that the collection of meta-
data by the DGSE is not illegal but a-legal, conducted outside the law.53 Further, the
lower levels of legal protection accorded to the collection of metadata in certain member
states (e.g. UK, Sweden) does not take into account that this information can
nevertheless be extremely revealing about individuals' lives. The exception here is the
Netherlands where the current legislative framework does not permit the Dutch
intelligence services to wiretap "cable bound communications" under any
circumstances.54 However, a modification to the law is expected in order to allow the
establishment and activities of the JSCU.55

As discussed above, the legislative frameworks of the UK, Sweden and Germany restrict
warrantless collection of data where it concerns internal communications between
residents of those member states, echoing the US restrictions on intercepting data
between US citizens under FISA. However, evidence revealing data exchange between
Western intelligence services raises a number of questions as to whether intelligence
agencies share data in order to plug the gaps or circumvent the legal
frameworks/safeguards intended to protect the rights of individuals in their national
jurisdictions. This would point to a potential scenario of privacy shopping by services to
exploit regimes with the weakest protection/oversight or with the greatest legal
loopholes. Such a scenario is to some extent reflected in reports indicating that GCHQ

52 Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament, Statement on GCHQ's Alleged Interception of
Communications under the US PRISM Programme, 17 July	2013, available at:
http://isc.independent.gov.uk/files/20130717 ISC statement GCHQ.pdf

53	Statement by Jacques Follorou at the European Parliament's LIBE Committee Inquiry on Electronic
Mass Surveillance of EU Citizens, 1st Hearing, 5 September 2013.

54	See Annex 1, Section 5.

55	See Annex 1, Section 5.

25

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

marketed itself to the NSA on the basis of the UK's weak regulatory and oversight
regime.56

As regards oversight, in several member states oversight bodies are faced with
constraints which hamper their ability to apply sufficient scrutiny to intelligence agencies'
surveillance practices. In Sweden, the two main oversight institutions, the intelligence
court (UNDOM) and the Inspection for Defence Intelligence Operations (SIUN) are
deemed to be insufficiently independent.57 In France the main oversight body, the
CNCIS, is deemed to be substantially constrained in its reach due to its limited
administrative capacity.58 There are gaps also in the UK's intelligence oversight regime,
as evidenced by the statement released in July by the ISC on GCHQ's Alleged
Interception of Communications under the PRISM Programme. The committee, chaired by
former foreign secretary Sir Malcolm Rifkind, took detailed evidence from GCHQ for its
investigation, including a list of counter-terrorist operations for which the UK was able to
obtain intelligence from the US, and found that GCHQ had acted within the law. The
statement59 however remains quite vague on what information it gained access to.
Moreover, it indicates that the members of the committee had no prior knowledge of
GCHQ's activities in the PRISM programme.

Finally, in terms of oversight it is worth considering the oversight mechanisms potentially
built in to systems and databases used to process and search data collected. The only
indication in this regard concerns the GCHQ's Tempora Programme which requires that in
order to target an individual's data via a "selector" — the operative will have to type into
a box on his or her computer screen a Miranda number, to show that the process is
taking place in response to a specific request for information, and will also need to select
a justification under the Human Rights Act from a drop-down menu.60 However, without
further information (e.g. how detailed these justifications are), it is difficult to judge to
what degree these mechanisms represent an administrative 'tick-box exercise' or
whether they operate as a genuine safeguard. In any case they cannot substitute a
strong institutional oversight framework which currently appears lacking in the member
states examined here.

56	N. Hopkins and S. Ackermann (2013), 'Flexible laws and weak oversight give GCHQ room for
manoeuvre,' The Guardian, 2 August 2013.

57	See Annex 1, Section 2.

58	See Annex 1, Section 3.

59	Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament, Statement on GCHQ's Alleged Interception of
Communications under the US PRISM Programme, op. cit.

60	J. Lancaster (2013), 'The Snowden files: why the British public should be worried about GCHQ,' The
Guardian, 3 October 2013.

26

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

3.	Legal Modalities of Action at EU level and Compatibility
with EU Law

KEY FINDINGS

•	Surveillance programmes in EU member states are incompatible with minimum
democratic rule of law standards which nurture from the EU Charter of
Fundamental Rights and the European Convention of Human Rights, and are in
turn constitutive components of their national constitutional traditions.

•	European fundamental rights commitments, enshrined and developed in the case-
law of the ECtHR and the CJEU, constitute key standards of the concept of
national security in EU law and are to be used at times of reviewing evolving
secretive surveillance practices.

•	The member states' surveillance programmes equally jeopardise the EU principle
of sincere cooperation, enshrined in Article 4.3 of the Treaty on European Union,
as they compromise; first, the compliance with exisiting EU level mutual
assistance and cooperation legal regimes and lawful searches between EU Member
States and with the USA; second, the coherency in EU's external relations with
the USA and other third countries; and third, the internal security of the Union as
a whole. They also jeopardise the privacy of EU nationals as data owners and data
citizens.

•	Large-scale electronic surveillance blurs the lines between national sovereignty
and matters relating to EU competence as it potentially spills over into the
security activities of the EU institutions and its agencies. More precisely, EU
liability may be invoked where EU agencies become implicated in sharing and
exploiting data generated by national surveillance operations.

•	The boundaries between domestic and foreign interception is blurred by data
exchange between intelligence services. At the same time, those member states'
domestic legal regimes which distinguish between the legal guarantees applied to
national citizens over other EU citizens may raise questions of discrimination.

Under European law, the individual has the ownership of his data, (unlike the US where it
is the company or service that has assembled the data). This principle is central and
protected by the EU Charter and the Treaty. Therefore, it can be contended that
transnational programmes linking the NSA with a series of European intelligence services
and facilitating data exchange, could potentially be considered as a 'theft' (of
correspondance) on top of the potentially illegal access, collection and processing and
data if this has been done without the authorisation and/or knowledge of the national
authorities, which are in charge of the management of these electronic data, and which
are the only ones that may authorise derogations in terms of national security under the
respect of the bilateral, European and international agreements previously signed.

A legal framework of the EU-US Mutual Legal Assistance Agreement (MLAA), has

been ratified by the Union and the US Congress, to permit collaboration that cover
criminal investigations, and counter terrorism activities in search of evidence for law
enforcement purposes. It stipulates the modalities for gathering and exchanging
information, and for requesting and providing assistance in obtaining evidence located in
one country to assist in criminal investigations or proceedings in another.61 The 61

61	Agreement on mutual legal assistance between the European Union and the United States of America,
OJ L 181/34, 19.07.2003.

27

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

channels permitting lawful search are therefore organised (and, it should be
noted, critiqued by NGOs and journalists as accepting too readily the logic of the global
counter terrorism initiated by the USA and its limitations to privacy). But it is not clear
from the revelations of the activities conducted by the NSA, that the US services and
their European Member State partners have even followed the rules of this
agreement, rather evidence indicates they have bypassed or ignored these
channels in favour of covert cooperation allowing to go beyond counter-terrorism
collaboration and serving a multitude of other purposes. John Lanchester, who has been
one of the rare persons to read the GCHQ files whose UK copy the Guardian was forced
to destroy, expresses clearly what is at stake. Certainly democratic states need
intelligence services, open societies have enemies, and tools of electronic surveillance are
useful against them. It is for this reason that the right to privacy needs to be qualified in
the interest of security, but the question arises when the technologies give the possibility
of mass capture of data and that they are used for strategic surveillance, as in that
case security without limits may put democracy at risk.62

The relationship between communications surveillance programmes and EU competences
remains a contested one. Intelligence activities are said to remain within the scope of
Member States exclusive competences in the EU legal system.63 Yet, are Member
States large scale surveillance programmes outside the remits of EU's
intervention? This Section develops three main legal modalities of action to assess and
critically examine EU mass surveillance programmes from an EU law viewpoint: First, the
concept of national security in a democratic rule of law framework (Section 3.1); Second,
the insecurity of the Union and its citizens (Section 3.2); Third, home affairs agencies
activities (Section 3.3).

3.1.	National Security and Democratic Rule of Law

Large scale surveillance programmes implemented by some EU Member States stand in a
difficult relationship with EU founding commitments, principles and legal obligations as
outlined in Article 2 TEU. This provision identifies a set of principles which are deemed to
be common to all EU Member States and which include, amongst others, the respect of
democracy, rule of law and human rights. It is argued that EU surveillance programmes
are incompatible with minimum democratic rule of law standards which are in turn
constitutive components of their national constitutional traditions. This is
premised on an understanding of rule of law as the legally based rule of a democratic
state, which delivers fundamental rights. O'Donnell has argued that the rule of law
should not only be understood as a generic characteristic of the legal system and the
performance of the courts, but also as the legally based rule of a democratic state, which
delivers fundamental rights (and limits the use of discretion or 'exceptionalism') by state
authorities.64 According to the 'democratic rule of law' the legal system needs to be in
itself democratic and there must be mechanisms of accountability and supervision by an
independent judiciary at the heart of the system.

The notion of 'national security' as framed and understood by some intelligence
communities and certain national governments in PRISM-like EU programmes does not
correspond with the democratic understanding of national security as foreseen in 62 63 64

62	John Lanchester "The Snowden files: why the British public should be worried about GCHQ", The
Guardian, 03/01/2013 accessed 14/10/2013. Available at http://bit.lv/17oYoB8

63	This is founded in Article 4.2 Treaty on European Union (TEU) which emphasises that "The Union shall
respect...their essential State functions, including ensuring the territorial integrity of the State,
maintaining law and order, and safeguarding national security. In particular, national security remains
the sole responsibility of each Member State". In the same vein, Article 72 of the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) stipulates that "This Title shall not affect the exercise of the
responsibilities incumbent upon Member States within regard to the maintenance of law and order and
the safeguarding of internal security".

64	G. O'Donnell (2004), The Quality of Democracy: Why the Rule of Law Matters? Journal of Democracy,
Vol. 15, No. 4, October.

28

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Member States' constitutional systems, where a key element of constitutionality
remains in the effective judicial control and supervision of executive or governmental
actions, including those circumscribed under the boundaries of State's national security.65

National constitutional traditions not only formally foresee the democratic and rule of law
foundations of the state, where 'the arbitrary' is carefully limited (so there exists an
adequate level of protection against abuse of power) and must be read from the
perspective of the separation of powers principle. Government and law enforcement are
in this way under scrutiny of the judiciary and open justice. Member States constitutions
now also feature European fundamental human rights commitments and standards
emerging from the European Convention of Human Rights and the EU Charter of
Fundamental Rights. These bring the jurisprudence and transnational supervision from
the Strasbourg Court (Section 3.1.1) and the Court of Justice of the European Union
(Section 3.1.2) at the core of the evolving national practices and concepts of 'national
security'.

3.1.1. National Security and the ECHR

There is a significant body of jurisprudence by the European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) on what constitutes interference "prescribed by law" in the context of secret
surveillance and information gathering. The judge-made requirements of "in accordance
to the law" and "necessary in a democratic society" have consolidated themselves as key
testing standards at times of determining the lawfulness and proportionality of
government's interferences with fundamental human rights such as those foreseen in
Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR), which lays down the right
to respect for family and private life.

A key issue of contestation before Strasbourg has been the extent to which national
governments justifications to interfere with ECHR rights have been 'in accordance with
the law' or 'prescribed by the law', pursue a legitimate aim and are necessary in a
democratic society. In its landmark judgment Weber and Saravia v. Germany of 2006,66
the Court examined the legality of the extension of the powers of the German Federal
Intelligence Service with regard to the recording of telecommunications in the course of
so-called 'strategic monitoring',67 as well as the use of personal data obtained and its
transmission to other authorities. The Court dismissed the applicants' complaints under

65	Refer for instance the Case Binyam Mohamed v. The Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs, 10.2.2010, where the England and Wales Court of Appeal ruled that (Paragraphs
132 and 133):

the ultimate decision whether to include the redacted paragraphs into the open version of the first judgment is
a matter for judicial, not executive, determination (...) it is ultimately for a judge, not a minister to decide
whether a document must be disclosed, and whether it can be referred to, in open court. That decision is for a
judge, not a minister, not least because it concerns what goes on in court, and because a judge is better able
to carry out the balancing exercise (...) Furthermore, practically any decision of the executive is subject to
judicial review, and it would seem to follow that a minister's opinion that a document should not be disclosed in
the national interest is, in principle, reviewable by a court. (...) What is included in, or excluded from, a
judgment is self-evidently a matter for a judge, not a minister. It is another aspect of the separation of powers
that the executive cannot determine whether certain material is included in, or excluded from, the open
material in a judgment. That must be a decision for the judge giving the judgment in issue, subject of course to
the supervisory jurisdiction of any competent appellate court. (Emphasis added).

See also German Federal Constitutional Court, Press Release no. 31/2013, 24 April 2013, Counter-
Terrorism Database in its Fundamental structures compatible with the Basic Law, but nor regarding
specific aspects of its design.

66	Weber and Saravia v. Germany, no. 54934/00, 29 June 2006, § 80. See also Association for European
Integration and Human Rights and Ekimzhiev, cited above, §§ 75-77.

67	''Strategic monitoring is aimed at collecting information by intercepting telecommunications in order to
identify and avert serious dangers facing the Federal Republic of Germany, such as an armed attack on
its territory or the commission of international terrorist attacks and certain other serious offences." See §
4 and paragraphs 18 et seq. of the judgement.

29

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

Article 8 ECHR on the basis that the German legislation68 provided adequate and effective
guarantees against abuses of State's strategic monitoring powers, and the interferences
with the secrecy of telecommunications were necessary in a democratic society in the
interests of national security and for the prevention of crime.

However, the Court established in the Weber case a set of criteria for determining the
lawfulness of secret surveillance and interference of communications and to avoid 'abuse
of powers' and arbitrariness. The Court underlined that the risks of arbitrariness are
particularly evident in those cases where a power vested in the executive is exercised in
secret, and therefore held that

It is therefore essential to have clear, detailed rules on interception of telephone
conversations, especially as the technology available for use is continually becoming
more sophisticated... The domestic law must be sufficiently clear in its terms to give
citizens an adequate indication as to the circumstances in which and the conditions on
which public authorities are empowered to resort to any such measures...68 69 *

In particular, the following minimum safeguards were highlighted, which should be set
out in statute law in order to avoid abuses of power: First, the nature of the offences
which may give rise to an interception order; Second, a definition of the categories of
people liable to have their telephones tapped; Third, a limit on the duration of telephone
tapping; Fourth, the procedure to be followed for examining, using and storing the data
obtained; Fifth, the precautions to be taken when communicating the data to other
parties; and the circumstances in which recordings may or must be erased or the tapes
destroyed.70 The ECtHR added in this respect that

... it would be contrary to the rule of law for the legal discretion granted to the
executive or to a judge to be expressed in terms of an unfettered power.
Consequently, the law must indicate the scope of any such discretion conferred on the
competent authorities and the manner of its exercise with sufficient clarity to give the
individual adequate protection against arbitrary interference.71 72 73 74 (Emphasis added)

The ECtHR found the UK's secret interception of communications to be in violation with
Article 8 of the ECHR in the case Liberty v. UK.72 In contrast with the situation addressed
in Weber, the Court considered that UK domestic law did not provide sufficient clarity, so
as to provide adequate protection against abuse of power, the scope or manner of
exercise of the very wide discretion conferred on the State to intercept and examine
external communications. It therefore found the UK to be in violation of Article 8 and that
the interference with the applicants' rights was not being "in accordance with the law".

The ECtHR paid especial attention to the requirement of foreseeability, i.e. the extent
to which UK domestic law that was adequately accessible and formulated with sufficient
precision as to be foreseeable. The authorities' conduct was not "in accordance with the
law" because it was unsupported by any predictable legal basis satisfying the accessibility
principle.73 The ECtHR stated that "The expression "in accordance with the law" under
Article 8 § 2 requires, first, that the impugned measure should have some basis in
domestic law; it also refers to the quality of the law in question, requiring that it should
be compatible with the rule of law and accessible to the person concerned, who must,
moreover, be able to foresee its consequences for him" 74 The ECtHR noted the

68	Gesetz zur Beschränkung des Brief-, Post- und Fernmeldegeheimnisses'), also called "the G 10 Act", as
modified by the Fight against Crime Act of 28 October 1994 (Verbrechensbekämpfungsgesetz).

69	Weber and Saravia v. Germany, op. cit. §93.

70

71

§ 95.

§ 94.

72	Liberty and Others v. the United Kingdom, no. 58243/00, 1/10/2008.

73	§ 56 of Liberty v. UK.

74	The Court recalled its findings in previous cases (see Weber and Saravia v. Germany (dec.), no.
54934/00, 29 June 2006, § 78) "that the mere existence of legislation which allows a system for the
secret monitoring of communications entails a threat of surveillance for all those to whom the legislation
may be applied. This threat necessarily strikes at freedom of communication between users of the

30

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Government's concern that "the publication of information regarding the arrangements
made by the Secretary of State for the examination, use, storage, communication and
destruction of intercepted material during the period in question might have damaged
the efficacy of the intelligence-gathering system or given rise to a security risk".
However, it stated that

...the German authorities considered it safe to include in the G10 Act, as examined in
Weber ..., express provisions about the treatment of material derived from strategic
interception as applied to non-German telephone connections. In particular, the G10
Act stated that the Federal Intelligence Service was authorised to carry out monitoring
of communications only with the aid of search terms which served, and were suitable
for, the investigation of the dangers described in the monitoring order and which
search terms had to be listed in the monitoring order. Moreover, the rules on storing
and destroying data obtained through strategic monitoring were set out in detail in
section 3(6) and (7) and section 7(4) of the amended G10 Act. ... The G10 Act further
set out detailed provisions governing the transmission, retention and use of data
obtained through the interception of external communications.75 (Emphasis added).

In Kennedy v. UK76 the ECtHR further examined the extent to which the secret
interception of communications by the UK security services was in accordance to the law
and necessary in a democratic society. The Court acknowledged that the Contracting
States enjoy a certain margin of appreciation in assessing the existence and extent of
such necessity, but stressed that this margin is nonetheless subject to European
supervision. It also pointed out that "the values of a democratic society must be
followed as faithfully as possible in the supervisory procedures, if the bounds of necessity
are not to be exceeded".77 It also stated that in a field where abuse is potentially so easy
in individual cases and could have such harmful consequences for democratic society as a
whole, it was in principle desirable to entrust supervisory control to a judge,78
and that sufficient detail should be provided of the nature of the offences in
question.79

In contrast to the Liberty and Others case which concerned the legislation on interception
of communications between the United Kingdom and any other country (external
communications), Kennedy concerned 'internal communications' which comprise
communications within the UK. The Court recalled that under UK law "Indiscriminate
capturing of vast amounts of communications is not permitted under the internal
communications provisions of RIPA".80 The ECtHR restated the three criteria according
to which an interference with a ECHR right may be justified and legitimate: First,
the impugned measure must have some basis in domestic law. Second, the domestic law
must be compatible with the rule of law and accessible to the person concerned. Third,
the person affected must be able to foresee the consequences of the domestic law for
him.81 The ECtHR also insisted that powers to instruct secret surveillance of citizens are
only tolerated under Article 8 "to the extent that they are strictly necessary for
safeguarding democratic institutions", which in practice means that 75 76 77 78 79 80 81

telecommunications services and thereby amounts in itself to an interference with the exercise of the
applicants' rights under Article 8, irrespective of any measures actually taken against them", § 59. See,
among other authorities, Kruslin v. France, judgment of 24 April 1990, Series A no. 176-A, § 27; Huvig
v. France, judgment of 24 April 1990, Series A no. 176-B, § 26; Lambert v. France, judgment of 24
August 1998, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998-V, § 23; Perry v. the United Kingdom, no.
63737/00, § 45, ECHR 2003-IX; Dumitru Popescu v. Romania (No. 2), no. 71525/01, § 61, 26 April
2007.

75	§ 68 of Liberty v. UK.

76	Kennedy v. the United Kingdom, no. 26839/05, 18.8.2010.

77	§ 154. See also Kvasnica v. Slovakia, no. 72094/01, § 80, 9 June 2009.

78	§ 167. See Klass and Others, § 56.

79	§ 159.

80	Liberty and Others, § 64.

81 See for instance Rotaru v. Romania, § 52; Liberty and Others, § 59; and Iordachi and Others, § 37.

31

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

... there must be adequate and effective guarantees against abuse. The assessment
depends on all the circumstances of the case, such as the nature, scope and duration
of the possible measures, the grounds required for ordering them, the authorities
competent to authorise, carry out and supervise them, and the kind of remedy
provided by the national law.82 83 (Emphasis added).

The Court has repeatedly stressed in its case law the importance of giving a narrow
interpretation to exceptions to basic fundamental human rights envisaged in the ECHR, in
particular to protect the individual against any abuse of power and in what concerns
human rights where no exceptions are allowed (absolute in nature). Cases related to the
so-called 'extraordinary renditions and secret detentions' have been illustrative in this
regard and have developed democratic rule of law standards which establish the
boundaries of lawfulness of secret intelligence activities in a democratic
society. As a way of illustration, the Court ruled in El-Masri v. Macedonia that an
essential object of Article 8 ECHR "is to protect the individual against arbitrary
interference by the public authorities" and that the interference must be "in accordance
with the law".83 In respect of the violation of Article 5 ECHR (right to liberty and
security), the Court held that

Although the investigation of terrorist offences undoubtedly presents the authorities
with special problems, that does not mean that the authorities have carte blanche
under Article 5 to arrest suspects and detain them in police custody, free from
effective control by the domestic courts and, in the final instance, by the Convention's
supervisory institutions, whenever they consider that there has been a terrorist
offence.84 85 86 87 (Emphasis added).

In Nada v. Switzerland of 2012,85 the ECtHR dealt with the review of the sanctions
regime established by Security Council Resolution 1267 (1999) to freeze the funds and
other financial resources of the individuals and entities identified by the Security
Council's Sanctions Committee as being associated with Osama bin Laden, al-Qaeda or
the Taliban, and the human rights consequences of the inability of the listed persons to
challenge effectively the decision to list them. The Court held that an interference with
ECHR rights could be considered "necessary in a democratic society" for a legitimate aim
"if it answers a "pressing social need" and, in particular, if it is proportionate to the
legitimate aim pursued and if the reasons adduced by the national authorities to justify it
are "relevant and sufficient".86 It added that for a measure to be regarded as
proportionate and as necessary in a democratic society, the possibility of recourse to an
alternative measure that would cause less damage to the fundamental right at issue
whilst fulfilling the same aim. Moreover, the ECtHR reiterated that in any event the final
evaluation of whether the interference is necessary remains subject to review
by the Court for conformity with the requirements of the Convention.87

82	See § 153. Klass and Others, cited above, §§ 49 to 50; and Weber and Saravia, cited above, § 106.

83	El-Masri v. Macedonia, No. 39630/09, 13 December 2012.

84	El-Masri v. Macedonia, op. cit., § 232.

85	Nada v. Switzerland, No. 10593/08, 12 September 2012.

86	§ 180. See also S. and Marper, cited above, § 101, and Coster v. the United Kingdom [GC],
no. 24876/94, § 104, 18 January 2001).

87	§ 184. However,

"A margin of appreciation must be left to the competent national authorities in this connection. The breadth of
this margin varies and depends on a number of factors including the nature of the Convention right in issue, its
importance for the individual, the nature of the interference and the object pursued by the interference (see S.
and Marper, § 102)."

The Court concluded that

the restrictions imposed on the applicant's freedom of movement for a considerable period of time did not
strike a fair balance between his right to the protection of his private and family life, on the one hand, and the
legitimate aims of the prevention of crime and the protection of Switzerland's national security and public
safety, on the other. Consequently, the interference with his right to respect for private and family life was not
proportionate and therefore not necessary in a democratic society. § 198.

32

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

3.1.2. National Security and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights
A second legal modality of action when assessing EU large-scale surveillance
programmes in a selection of EU Member States is their relationship with the EU Charter
of Fundamental Rights. The EU Charter has been recognised the same legal value as the
Treaties since the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty. The EU Charter comes along a set
of EU general principles some of which find their origins in national constitutional
traditions and others have been further developed by the CJEU jurisprudence. The
national constitutional traditions of EU Member States are illustrating a progressive
'process of constitutionalisation' of the EU Charter in their domestic legal
systems. This has been confirmed by the European Commission's 2012 Annual Report
on the Application of the EU Charter,88 89 which covered an assessment of the Member
States' frameworks of judicial reviews of 'constitutionality', and which concluded that

The analysis of court rulings referring to the Charter further suggests that national
judges use the Charter to support their reasoning, including when there is not
necessarily a link with EU law. There is also some evidence of an incorporation of the
Charter in the national systems of fundamental rights protection.89 (Emphasis added)

The CJEU pointed out in Fransson90 that 'outside the scope of EU law' national authorities
and courts remain free to apply national standards of protection of fundamental rights,
provided that the level of protection offered for by the Charter, as interpreted
by the Court, and the primacy, unity and effectiveness of European law are not
compromised. The CJEU has in this way held that the EU Charter is becoming a
constitutive component of 'the national constitutional traditions' of EU Member States. As
Vice-President of the European Commission, Viviene Reding has stated,91

The concept of national security does not mean that "anything goes": States do not
enjoy an unlimited right of secret surveillance. In Europe, also in cases involving
national security, every individual - irrespective of their nationality - can go to a
Court, national or European, if they believe that their right to data protection has been
infringed. Effective judicial redress is available for Europeans and non-Europeans alike.

This is a basic principle of European law. (Emphasis added).

In the same vein, Reding reiterated the relevance of the EU Charter presentation on 19
June 2013 at the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs (LIBE) of the
European Parliament.92 During the questions and answers, and following questions from
MEPs referring to the lack of EU competence in what concerns intelligence services
activities, Reding stated that

... "intelligence" of course is not in our remit, but ... even in questions of intelligence
the fundamental rights which are inscribed in our basic text are not eliminated but
they are also to be considered. So the position of the European Commission and the
defence of the fundamental rights of the citizens is without any doubt in that respect.
(Emphasis added).

88	European Commission, 2012 Annual Report on the Application of the EU Charter of Fundamental
Rights, 2013, European Commission, DG for Justice, retrievable from
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/fundamental-rights/files/charter report 2012 en.pdf

89	Ibid, page 15. Reference was in particular made to the Austrian Constitutional Court, Cases U 466/11
and U 1836/11, 14.3.2012, where according to the European Commission the Constitutional Court

... recognised the very special role of the Charter within the EU legal system, and its different nature compared
to the body of rights and principles which the Court of Justice of the EU has been developing throughout the
years. It took the view that the Charter is enforceable in the proceedings brought before it for the judicial
review of national legislation, and therefore individuals can rely upon the rights and the principles recognised in
the Charter when challenging the lawfulness of domestic legislation. The Austrian Constitutional Court identified
strong similarities between the role played by the Charter in the EU legal system and that played by the ECHR
under the Austrian Constitution, according to which the ECHR has force of constitutional law.

90	Case C-617/10, Fransson, 26 February 2013.

91	V. Reding, PRISM scandal: The data protection rights of EU citizens are non-negotiable, Press
Conference, EU-U.S. Justice and Home Affairs Ministerial /Dublin, 14 June 2013.

92	Refer to www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/news-room/content/20130617IPR12352/html/PRISM-EU-
citizens'-data-must-be-properly-protected-against-US-surveillance

33

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

The relevance of effective and open justice was underlined by CJEU in the case ZZ v.
Secretary of the State of Home Department C-300/11, of 4 June 2013, which confirmed
that the provision of effective judicial review is a central component even within the
scope of Member States measures adopted on the basis of 'State security'.93 94 The CJEU
was of the opinion that "although it is for Member States to take the appropriate
measures to ensure their internal and external security, the mere fact that a decision
concerns State security cannot result in European Union law being inapplicable".94 It
added that in those circumstances where a national authority opposes precise and full
disclosure to the person concern of the grounds constituting a decision refusing entry in a
Member State for reasons of State security,95 Member States are required to

... first, to provide for effective judicial review both of the existence and validity of the
reasons invoked by the national authority with regard to State security and of the
legality of the decision taken under Article 27 of Directive 2004/38 and, second, to
prescribe techniques and rules relating to that review, as referred to in the preceding
paragraph of the present judgment.96

The CJEC concluded that the contested regulations, which did not provide for any remedy
in respect of the freezing of assets, were in breach of fundamental rights and were to be
annulled. Here also, the relevance of effective judicial review and scrutiny was identified
as a central component of an EU understanding of rule of law. The Luxembourg Court
held that such review should be seen as a "constitutional guarantee" forming part of
the very foundations of the Community and that

... the Community is based on the rule of law, inasmuch as neither its Member States
nor its institutions can avoid review of the conformity of their acts with the basic
constitutional charter, the EC Treaty, which established a complete system of legal
remedies and procedures designed to enable the Court of Justice to review the legality
of acts of the institutions.97 (Emphasis added).

3.2.	Whose Security? Sincere Cooperation and Citizens' Liberties
Compromised

The legal tensions between large-scale surveillance and democratic rule of law with
fundamental rights endanger as a consequence the security of the Union and that of its
citizens, and unleash insecurity for the Union as a whole. The intelligence communities'
understandings and practices of national security and Member States' surveillance
programmes equally jeopardise the EU principle of sincere cooperation, as they make
more difficult carrying out the tasks flowing from the Treaties and put at risk the
attainment of the Union's objectives, including those in external relations and the
common foreign and security policy.98

93	See also the Kadi Judgement on judicial supervision
http://curia.europa.eu/iuris/document/document.isf?text=&docid=139745&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&
mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid = 205883. Paragraphs 326 and 327.

94	See Case C-387/05 Commission v Italy [2009] ECR I-11831, paragraph 45.

95	5 7 states that "However. if. in exceptional cases. a national authority opposes precise and full
disclosure to the person concerned of the grounds which constitute the basis of a decision taken under
Article 27 of Directive 2004/38. by invoking reasons of State security. the court with jurisdiction in the
Member State concerned must have at its disposal and apply techniques and rules of procedural law
which accommodate. on the one hand. legitimate State security considerations regarding the nature and
sources of the information taken into account in the adoption of such a decision and. on the other hand.
the need to ensure sufficient compliance with the person's procedural rights. such as the right to be
heard and the adversarial principle".

96	Paragraph 58. See also paragraphs 65 and 66.

97	Paragraph 281. Case 294/83 Les Verts v Parliament [1986] ECR 1339. paragraph 23.

98	Refer to Article 4.3 TEU which states that "Pursuant to the principle of sincere cooperation, the Union
and the Member States shall, in full mutual respect, assist each other in carrying out tasks which flow
from the Treaties. The Member States shall take any appropriate measure, general or particular, to
ensure fulfilment of the obligations arising out of the Treaties or resulting from the acts of the institutions

34

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

The violations of democratic rule of law and fundamental rights inherent to large-scale
surveillance, and their supranational nature and fundamentals, affect the security of the
Union as a whole. They also jeopardize the use of legally established channels at EU
level, some of which have been concluded with the USA. As Reding said in the above
mentioned intervention in the EP LIBE Committee in June 2013, "if you don't go through
the MLA and directly to companies asking data of EU citizens that is a violation of
international law (Recital 90 of Regulation)".

In a Council of the EU Discussion Paper on COSI and terrorism it was stated that

Regardless of this [i.e. Article 4.2 TEU], the transnational nature of terrorism and its
perpetrators makes it a clear threat also to the common internal security of the Union.

It is therefore important that the work against terrorism, at least when it affects the
EU as a whole, is coordinated so that it can be conducted efficiently and focused on
common identified and prioritised threats. 99 (Emphasis added).

A similar argument could be used in light of the nature of some of the EU large-scale
surveillance programmes existing in a number of Member States. Just as 'acts of political
violence' are said to be increasingly supranational, so the process of 'intelligence
gathering' are supranational as well, coming from a variety of sources abroad or 'at
home'. Their supranational nature and implications make the national security as framed
and understood by certain actors in the 'intelligence communities' not only in tension
with the security of that state as democratic rule of law, but also that of the other
Member States and the of the Union as a whole.

EU large-scale surveillance programmes also compromise the security and fundamental
human rights of citizens and residents in the Union, in particular those related to privacy
and effective legal protection. The involvement of certain EU Member States in NSA
programmes deprive EU citizens of their ownership of their personal and private data,
and subject them to discriminatory treatments, i.e. nationals of other EU Member States
are subject to a larger disproportionate impact of large scale surveillance programmes,
as they are unjustifiably less favorably treated than nationals as privacy holders in
interceptions of 'internal communications'. For example, Privacy International has argued
that the UK Tempora programme involves unjustified discrimination against non-UK
nationals and EU citizens. In its submission, Privacy International highlighted that

Further, the operation is in breach of Article 12(1) TFEU. The Tempora operation has a
disparate adverse impact on EU citizens who are not nationals of the United Kingdom.

This is because a certification under section 8(4) of RIPA 2000 can only be granted in
respect of the interception of external communications, which are more likely to be
made by non-UK citizens. Union citizens who are not UK citizens are far more likely to
have their communications intercepted, searched and retained. Both UK citizens and
non-UK citizens pose risks to national security. Accordingly, such differences in

of the Union. The Member States shall facilitate the achievement of the Union's tasks and refrain from
any measure which could jeopardise the attainment of the Union's objectives." See also Article 24.3 TFEU
which stipulates that "The Member States shall support the Union's external and security policy actively
and unreservedly in a spirit of loyalty and mutual solidarity and shall comply with the Union's action in
this area. The Member States shall work together to enhance and develop their mutual political
solidarity. They shall refrain from any action which is contrary to the interests of the Union or likely to
impair its effectiveness as a cohesive force in international relations."

99	Council of the EU (2013), Discussion Paper on COSI and Terrorism, 10162/13, Brussels, 3 June 2013,
p. 3. See also Council of the EU, Standing Committee on Operational Cooperation on Internal Security
(COSI), Summary of Discussions, 11265/13, Brussels, 24 June 2013, page 5, where it was said that

The Swedish discussion paper on the COSI competences and tasks with regard to terrorism (doc. 10612/12)
was welcomed by various delegations. Several delegations suggested having a wider debate at some stage on
whether COSI is fulfilling its mandate and where it could provide added value, including in the context of the
Council's JHA structures (CATS, SCIFA). Delegations felt that COSI could address the topic of terrorism but with
due respect to the provisions of the Treaty and Member States' competences. Delegations also highlighted that
duplication of efforts with other working parties such as the Terrorism Working Party and COTER should be
avoided.

35

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

treatment are not justifiable or lawful. A systematic scheme of processing of personal
data primarily directed at non-UK nationals cannot be justified under EU law.100

There is also a fundamental gap in current EU legal framework which increases the
vulnerability of citizens privacy-related rights and liberties. As additionally alleged by
Privacy International in its complaint before the Strasbourg Court of July 2013.101 They
highlight in particular that those differences between foreign and domestic interception
and information gathering regimes lead to an absence of legal protection when
information is shared between countries.

PRISM-like surveillance programmes challenge this premise (a central distinction has
been made between foreign and domestic interception and information gathering secrete
regimes), and reveal a gap in protection and accountability in the EU. Are the
distinctions between internal and external communications any longer relevant
in what concerns warrant schemes for interceptions in Member States legal
systems?102

3.3.	Home Affairs Agencies

Another means by which large scale surveillance practices blur the lines between national
sovereignty and matters relating to EU competence is their potential spillover into the
security activities of the EU institutions and its agencies. More precisely, EU liability may
be invoked where the EU's institutions and its agencies become implicated in sharing and
exploiting data generated by national large scale surveillance operations.

This is particularly relevant as regards the activities of EU Home Affairs agencies which
play a central role in putting into practice the "comprehensive model for information
exchange" which sits at the heart of the EU's Internal Security Strategy.103 Europol and
INTCEN (and to a lesser extent Eurojust, Frontex and OLAF) are key actors at the
forefront of gathering, exchanging and processing information often based on
consolidated versions of reporting and contributions from Member States' national
security and intelligence agencies. 100 101 102 103

100	Privacy International submission to the Investigatory Powers Tribunal, 'Statement of Grounds', 8 July
2013, paragraph 57, available at: www.privacyinternational.org. Reference was here made to the Case
C-524/06 Huber v Germany [2008] ECR I-9705 at [69-81].

101	"With communication being increasingly global, and vast amounts of personal data being transferred
and stored around the world, there is an obvious gap in legal protection to ensure respect for private life.
The regimes in both the US and the UK governing the interception, obtaining, and storing of material
deal differently with foreign and domestic interception and information gathering (in the UK the
difference depends on whether communication is regarded as "internal" or "external" and in the US on
whether or not the person targeted is a non-US citizen located outside the US). Those differences
between foreign and domestic interception and information gathering regimes lead to an absence of legal
protection when information is shared between countries. UK authorities can intercept communications
sent or received by individuals located in the US (and which will be regarded as "external" for the
purposes of RIPA), which happen to pass through UK fibre cables, and hand them over to US authorities,
thus avoiding the US rules governing interception of those located within the country. The NSA can
intercept an email under FISA section 1881a which is sent between two individuals in London because it
happens to travel through the US as it will be regarded as "foreign intelligence material" as far as the US
authorities are concerned, and it can then be handed over to the UK authorities without their having to
comply with any of the requirements governing interception set out in RIPA and the Code of Practice. The
same is true of private information about UK residents stored by internet companies in the US." Ibid,
paragraph 45.

102	Liberty vs. UK

14. The IPT found that the difference between the warrant schemes for interception of internal and
external communications was justifiable, because it was more necessary for additional care to be taken
with regard to interference with privacy by a Government in relation to domestic telecommunications,
given the substantial potential control it exercised in this field; and also because its knowledge of, and
control over, external communications was likely to be much less extensive. THIS IS NO LONGER THE
CASE

103	E. Guild and S. Carrera (2011), 'Towards an Internal (In)security Strategy for the EU?' CEPS Liberty
and Security Series, January 2011.

36

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Europol for instance relies to a large degree on the input of member states' intelligence
services to feed its strategic analysis products, such as the annual EU Terrorism and
Situation and Trend Reports (TE-SAT).104 Similarly the EU Intelligence Analysis Centre
(INTCEN) within the EEAS acts as 'a single entry point in the EU for classified information
coming from Member States' civilian intelligence and security services' and on this basis
produces intelligence analyses, early warnings and situational awareness to the EEAS, EU
decision-making bodies and member states.105

The processes surrounding the exchange of intelligence between the member states and
EU home affairs agencies like Europol and INTCEN are notoriously opaque.106 There is no
mechanism to verify the nature of data and information transferred to EU level, nor to
ensure that the sources and means by which such data is generated are legitimate and in
compliance with the national laws of the member state in question and EU fundamental
rights standards. Europol Director Rob Wainwright, during the European Parliament
Hearing of 24th September 2013, stressed that the EU's law enforcement agency "has no
contacts at all with the NSA or CIA".107 However, he conceded that data dealt with by
Europol agents and received direct from the member states may originate from EU
intelligence agencies, and even the NSA. The lack of clarity in this response is somewhat
in keeping when one considers the gaps in oversight that characterise the flow of
information within the agency: a significant proportion of the data that passes through
Europol is understood to be exchanged bi-laterally between national liaison officers
stationed in Europol. However, it provides little reassurance as to the trusted nature of
Europol's information sources.

There is therefore a strong possibility that tainted information - i.e. data gleaned from
unlawful mass surveillance or exchanged without due regard for compliance with
fundamental rights, data protection and privacy standards, would enter the AFSJ and be
shared and processed at EU level. This possibility should bring a number of concerns for
EU lawmakers. It implies a degree (however limited) of complicity by EU agencies in
practices which present a number of tensions with fundamental EU legal principles and
human rights standards. EU agencies could therefore share in any liability resulting from
the mis-use of this data.

The liability incurred by EU agencies raises an important side issue about the data that is
handled by these organisational actors and the justification for their access to often
sensitive information. As Geyer notes, when considering the risk that EU institutions and
agencies have handled intelligence resulting from extraordinary rendition and the torture
of terror suspects, information processed at EU level does not serve to avoid 'imminent
security threats' but rather serves mid- and long-term policy objectives or - as in the
case of Europol and INTCEN - the creation of risk analysis, strategic reports and threat
assessments. In this light, the already questionable argumentation brought forward at
national level to justify the use of large scale surveillance techniques, i.e. to counter
direct threats to national security, is even less applicable to the access and use of such
information at EU level.108

Finally, the sharing of intelligence with EU agencies such as Europol further blurs the
question of legal competence. Europol is established under Article 88 of the Lisbon Treaty

104	See Europol, TE-SAT 2013 - EU Terrorism Situation and Trend Report.

105	EU Intelligence Analysis Centre (EU INTCEN), Factsheet. Available at:
www.asktheeu.org/en/reauest/637/response/2416/attach/5/EU%20INTCEN%20Factsheet%20PUBLIC%2
0120618%201.pdf

106	J. Parkin (2012), EU Home Affairs Agencies and the Construction of EU Internal Security, CEPS Liberty
and Security Series, December 2012; C. Jones (2013), Secrecy reigns at the EU's Intelligence Analysis
Centre, Statewatch Analysis.

107	European Parliament, LIBE Committee Inquiry on Electronic Mass Surveillance of EU Citizens, 23
September 2013.

108	F. Geyer (2007), Fruit of the Poisonous Tree - Member States' Indirect Use of Extraordinary Rendition and
the EU Counter-Terrorism Strategy, Centre for European Policy Studies, 3 April 2007.

37

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

under chapter V, 'Police Cooperation' and its legal mandate establishes the agency as a
law enforcement body. However, the sharing of information with Europol by national
intelligence services not only potentially compromises the agency's integrity, it also
renders indistinguishable the boundaries of what is police cooperation and what is
intelligence at EU level. The tendency reflects the merging of police, military and
intelligence logics and practices that we've seen at national level in the operation of large
scale surveillance programmes (see section two) and creates a legal insecurity and
uncertainty in the actions of EU agencies. This could partly be addressed during the
forthcoming revision of Europol's legal mandate, in order to ensure greater accountability
and oversight of this agency's actions. Despite claims as to the necessity of such
intransparency/autonomy as central to EU home affairs agencies functioning, the
application of a 'balance approach' is not applicable given that the activities of these
agencies hold profound implications for human rights and liberties.

38

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

4.	Conclusions and Recommendations: Implications of
Large Scale Surveillance for Freedom, Fundamental
Rights, Democracy and Sovereignty in the EU

4.1. General conclusions

In light of the previous sections, the implications of the different programmes that have
engaged into practices of large-scale surveillance have to be underlined, especially from
a fundamental rights perspective. These implications are far reaching and go beyond the
traditional dilemma between the rights of citizens to data protection and the right of the
state to depart from the Rule of law in the name of national security. They raise
questions about the nature of our political regimes, and the nature of sovereignty.

As we have explained in section 2, what is at stake is not an opposition between the USA
and Europe. What is at stake is what is done with the data gathered by
intelligence services when large-scale surveillance is taking place: is it
"targeted" surveillance, or "mass-surveillance"? Most European services involved in
the fight against terrorism and organised crime have used the large-scale collection of
metadata as a way to "connect the dots" between the activities of suspects in criminal
investigations. They have used surveillance in order to reconstitute networks of possible
suspects associated with their main target, drawing both on real-time and stored data. In
this case, even if large-scale collection is taking place, it may be considered as "targeted
surveillance". Based on warrants and on clear purposes that can be overseen at a later
date, it can be justified. This is the kind of surveillance that the legal framework of the
EU-US Mutual Legal Assistance Agreement (MLAA) has organised. Even if some lawyers
consider that this scope is already a problem for data protection and privacy, this
agreement at the very least allows room for negotiation.

However, in the case of European services collaborating with the NSA through the
different surveillance programmes, the situation is markedly different. These
collaborations have been kept secret and go beyond the legality of the agreements in
place. One can presume they may have implied forms of spying activities against
European companies in favour of US companies. One can also presume they may have
breached the solidarity principle between European countries in favour of other alliances,
notably by sending data of other European citizens without the knowledge of their own
state to the NSA and its allies of the enlarged Five Eyes network. One can wonder if
routine practices that exceed mere targeted surveillance and that de facto emancipate
intelligence services from principles of rule of law have taken place. The question
remains: how far this surveillance goes? How data obtained by such surveillance are
exploited?

Once extracted, data may be used for multi-purposes if they are retained, either by
intelligence services, Internet providers or their subcontractors. Some journalists and
people interviewed have pointed out that extension of large scale surveillance expands
the number of persons put on watch lists around the world, with the tendency to consider
that the best platform for watch lists is one with "more people in it", without further
considering the quality of the information on which such lists are based. To what extent
can these forms of profiling and strategic surveillance be considered as data mining?

It seems that NSA surveillance programmes resemble the TIA: they are multi-purpose,
warrantless and may imply forms of data mining. They are not just anti-terrorist
programmes set up to detect plotters working against the national interests of the United
States - despite the NSA Director' claim that this was the case. We still do not know if it
is the case or not, but if data mining and predictive analytics are involved, the analysis of
the different programmes involving large scale surveillance cannot be reduced to a
question of a balance between security and privacy, nor to a question of asymmetry of
sovereignties in diplomatic alliances: it is a question of security measures putting

39

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

democracy at risk. A first challenge for the future is therefore to discuss the
legitimacy of such programmes and to prevent the path leading to data mining.

A second challenge is to assess the efficiency of this type of surveillance. At a

very pragmatic level, large-scale surveillance appears to have strong limitations and is
certainly not key in crime prevention. Such surveillance creates a double tendency. The
first tendency is to collect data extensively and retain them over a long period of time in
order to establish series of trends that facilitates big data correlations and hierarchies.
The question of data retention is thus significant, and raises considerable legal
challenges. The second tendency is to create additional categories that encapsulate
series of criteria of profiling, in order to target specific groups of individual that can be
managed by human beings. The question of human resources managing these data thus
becomes an important one too. These retention and selection process are supposedly in
place to ensure the quality of the information, whereas quantity can generates errors
(false negatives and false positives). However, one can easily see that even if algorithms
can help to connect a series of elements, this will not necessarily give a meaningful result
in terms of prevention. Even if cyber surveillance can help to "connect the dots", most of
the time such gathering of information becomes meaningful only after a specific event
has occurred, not before. Stella Remington, former Director General of MI5, recalled this
very eloquently when she explained that despite the fact that the intelligence services in
Boston had information on the Chechen perpetrators of the Boston bombings in April
2013, they were unable to anticipate the attack and therefore the services in charge
could not be held responsible for what happened. She explicitly made the point that,
even with computer programmes, it was not possible to put under effective surveillance a
group of people with less than five agents on each case. In light of the numerous
uncertainties that surround cyber/communications surveillance, she also expressed
doubts and concerns about the costs of investments in this kind of surveillance, as, as
she pointed out: it is impossible to 'keep tabs on every suspect'.109 In addition mass
surveillance via data mining may be a strategy to retrofitting evidence in a case after
having exercised undue surveillance and may disrupt the process of criminal justice
instead of accelerating it. Large scale surveillance is in that case not oriented towards
evidence findings, but towards an array of presumptions, which are justified ex-post
through allegations of contacts between individuals that may be at three levels of
association from each other.

A third challenge is to revisit US/EU relationships in the field of surveillance. At

a diplomatic level, the US largely dominates the diplomacy of surveillance, in ways that
clearly disrupt the cohesion of the EU in the field. The US surveillance agencies have
maintained a matrix of reading and cooperation inherited from the cold war with three
different layers:

•	The Five Eyes (US-UK-Canada-Australia-New Zealand) that originated from a
1946 multilateral agreement for cooperation in signals intelligence, with which the
US partly cooperate in collecting information and sharing results; network which
has extended over time in terms of tasks with Echelon and in terms of privileged
partners, especially Sweden that, accordingly to Mark Klamberg, permit to 5 eyes
to gain access to the internet cables of the baltic states and Russia through them,
as well as the special relationship of 5 eyes with Israel for all the region of Middle
East.

•	Some EU countries with whom the US had ad hoc collaborations and sometimes
aggressive relationships (France, Germany, Italy, Benelux and Switzerland,
Poland); in terms of collaborations, the DGSE in Paris was the node of a different
network of 6 countries called Alliance base, different from Five Eyes and
regrouping four of the five eyes (New Zealand is not in - may be as a reminder of
the rainbow warrior), but adding France and Germany. Alliance base is believed to

109	R. Alexander (2013), 'Terror Watch Lists: Can You Keep Tabs On Every Suspect?', BBC News, 2 June
2013, available at: www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-22718000

40

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

have ended in 2009 because of tensions between the French and the US.110 In
terms of difficult relationships the US and France have accused reciprocally the
other country to have conducted illicit economic espionage.

• The other countries of Europe, Middle East and South America, which they
consider as pure targets for their operations and do not want in any collaborative
process

It is therefore delusive to consider that the EU Member States as a whole and moreover
the EU institutions (Council and Commission) can become a strong stakeholder in
negotiations with the US in the field of surveillance, despite the efforts of the EU
Counter-Terrorism Coordinator. As an addition, EU Member States also have a different
attitude concerning the collaboration with the US in terms of intelligence. This is reflected
in their different national laws that explicitly protect the collaboration between their
services and the US from investigating judges. Therefore, at a diplomatic level, large
scale communications surveillance reveals strong asymmetries at the international level.

A fourth challenge for the future is how to tackle the involvement of private
actors in this surveillance game. Private actors have now become a significant part of
the large scale surveillance, and play a key mediation role between the state and the
citizens' rights. The development of transnational platforms of exchange of information,
and the participation at all stages of private actors should receive full attention of the
European Parliament. The rights of citizens, but also of consumers are here both at
stake. As clearly demonstrated in a previous European Parliament note dedicated to
cloud computing111, the set of relations currently defining cloud computing technologies
and crime prevention encompasses negotiations and tensions between public authorities
and private entities. In this set of relationships, data protection and privacy are often
objects of negotiations to the detriment of the individuals' rights.

In any case, it appears clear that, at a democratic level, large scale surveillance
restructures the very notion of security and protection of human beings as well
as the conceptions we have of freedom and fundamental rights. The types of
profiling large scale surveillance generates is highly discriminatory and disrupts social
cohesion. Eminent sociologists have convincingly argued that the use of statistics over
specific groups of population not only undermines the idea that diversity is perfectly
legitimate and desirable in a free society, but also leads to discrimination and
stigmatisation112. The challenges underlined above are paramount for the future of our
democracies, and will be with us for some time. Not tackling them would inevitably
create room for new scandals and delegitimisation of all the actors involved. A lack of
actions of the European institutions will not help putting an end to the controversy, while
silence could be interpreted as a form of complicity.

The French Ligue des Droits de I'Homme has already taken action. As they underlined,
these activities are no longer within the scope of antiterrorist and counter-intelligence
activities: they are a form of 'fraudulent access and retention in an automated data
processing system' with 'illegal collection of personal data', 'violation of intimacy and
privacy' and 'violations of the confidentiality of correspondence'.113 Other NGOs have
suggested the link with cyber theft of identities. Could these surveillance activities be

110	Source: D. Servenay (2010), 'Terrorisme: pourquoi Alliance Base a fermé à Paris', Rue89, 24 May

2010, available at:	http://www.rue89.com/2010/05/24/terrorisme-fermeture-dalliance-base-a-paris-

152349

111	D. Bigo et al (2012), Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud, Study for the European
Parliament, PE 462.509

112	See: H. Becker (1963), Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance, New York: The Free Press; D.
Lyon (2003), Surveillance as Social Sorting: Privacy, Risk and Automated Discrimination, London:
Routledge; O. H. Gandy, Jr. (2002), "Data Mining and Surveillance in the Post-9.11 Environment",
IAMCR Data Mining, 7 November 2002

113	See Libération (2013), "Enquête à Paris sur le programme d'espionnage américain Prism",
28/08/2013. http://bit.lv/1euuOar Accessed 17/10/2013

41

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

considered as forms of cyber crime? Rob Wainwright, Director of Europol, immediately
argued that Europol '[has] no mandate to investigate any allegations of unauthorised
activities by governments'. This significantly contrasts with Europol's retroactive positions
concerning the cyber-attack against Estonia, allegedly carried out by Chinese intelligence
services.114

National security is not the sole property of intelligence communities or national
governments. National security interests are subject to supra-national democratic rule of
law processes and standards, which now include human rights instruments/actors
(ECHR) and post-national (fundamental rights) institutions like the European Union and
its fundamental rights acquis. It could be argued that large scale surveillance practices in
EU Member States constitute a systematic and persistent breach of the Union's values as
foreseen in Article 7 TEU. Viviane Reding implicitly brought what is occurring in the UK
under the remits of Article 7 TEU by stating that:

... you certainly have noted that when a journalist is put under pressure in one of our
Eastern Member States, Foreign Ministers from Germany, Britain, France, Sweden and
Finland get very excited and ask the Commission to intervene. The European
Parliament immediately calls for a plenary debate and tables a motion for a resolution
condemning this incident. But we received not a single call from all these Foreign
Ministers and all these Parliamentarians when Mr Miranda was arrested at the airport
in London three weeks ago. Or when the Guardian had to destroy certain evidence on
request of the British government.115

The controversies raised by the recent revelations will not vanish easily, even if legal
actions and concrete initiatives may take time. The actions, or the lack of actions, of the
European Parliament will be watched carefully. With the European elections approaching,
one should not under-estimate the consequences this could have on voters: there is
indeed a possible rise of European parties that advocate less power for EU institutions,
precisely because the latter are seen as ineffective to protect their citizens and the
residents living in the EU. The Commission has already asked the director of the NSA and
the UK representative in Brussels to account for what has happened. Letters have been
sent and no answers were given. It is here the credibility of the Commission itself
that is at stake, and more generally of the EU institutions.

4.2. Policy Recommendations

The following recommendations explore possibilities for the EP to fully exercise its role as
a safeguard for EU citizens' rights.

Recommendation 1: The European Parliament should use the powers as its
disposal to require explanations from the US and to investigate further EU
Member States collaborations with the NSA.

It could, for instance, ask for immediate suspensions of some existing agreements, such
as the TFTP Agreement. It is also possible to reschedule the agenda concerning the
negotiations for the US-EU Transatlantic Free Trade Agreement.116

The EP could also re-introduce proposals that were discarded after intense lobbying from
the US administration. The "anti-Fisa clause" (the proposed article 42 of the Data

114	" MEPs raise suspension of EU-US bank data deal", European Parliament, Press release, 24/09/2013.
http://bit.lv/1euwVDh Accessed 17/10/2013

115	http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-13-677_en.htm

116	The freezing or termination of the TFTP Agreement with the United States was raised by MEPs during
a hearing of the LIBE Committee on 24 September 2013. See www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/news-
room/content/20130923IPR20604/html/MEPs-raise-suspension-of-EU-US-bank-data-deal.

42

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

protection regulation draft117), in particular, would have nullified any U.S. request for
technology and telecoms companies to hand over data on EU citizens.

The EP could finally launch a specific enquiry on the specific network of intelligence
agencies that are working with the NSA in Europe in order to analyse more in detail what
is the nature and the scale of their cooperation. A key element would be to assess if the
transnational governmental networks that have a transatlantic dimension are engaging in
a sort of "privacy shopping" by exchanging targets of surveillance in order to use the
loopholes created in many national privacy laws by the existing difference in terms of
protection regarding the nationality or/and territory criteria of the surveillance (foreign
intelligence justification).

Recommendation 2: A "professional code for the transnational management of
data" within the EU should be set up, including guidelines on how this code
would apply to EU partners

Such a code could limit the unlawful practices of intelligence services without
undermining their efficiency. Sir David Omand, former director of GCHQ between 1996
and 1997, has proposed a series of best practices that could be implemented so that
intelligence services act in full respect of democratic rules.118 These elements are central
if a red line has to be agreed on, taking into account all the actors involved. These
principles raised by David Omand could be used as a "professional" charter, applied to all
the services involved in the access to European data:

There must be sufficient sustainable cause. Any tendency for the secret world to
encroach into areas unjustified by the scale of potential harm to national interests has
to be checked.

There must be integrity of motive. No hidden agendas: the integrity of the whole
system throughout the intelligence process must be assured, from collection to
analysis and presentation.

The methods used must be proportionate. Their likely impact must be
proportionate to the harm that is sought to prevent, for example by using only the
minimum intrusion necessary into the private affairs of others.

There must be right and lawful authority. There must be the right level of sign-off
on sensitive operations, with accountability up a recognised chain of command to
permit effective oversight.

There must be a reasonable prospect of success. All intelligence operations need
careful risk management, and before approval is given there has to be consideration of
the likelihood of unintended consequences and the impact if the operation were to be
exposed or otherwise go wrong

Recourse to secret intelligence must be a last resort. There should be no
reasonable alternative way of acquiring the information by non-secret methods.119

An additional principle should be: one should not mix what constitutes suspicious
criminal activities and what constitutes different life styles. This principle is

117	"Article 42 requires for transfers to third countries, where no adequacy decision has been adopted by
the Commission, to adduce appropriate safeguards, in particular standard data protection clauses,
binding corporate rules and contractual clauses. The possibility of making use of Commission standard
data protection clauses is based on Article 26(4) of Directive 95/46/EC. As a new component, such
standard data protection clauses may now also be adopted by a supervisory authority and be declared
generally valid by the Commission. Binding corporate rules are now specifically mentioned in the legal
text. The option of contractual clauses gives certain flexibility to the controller or processor, but is
subject to prior authorisation by supervisory authorities." Proposal for a Regulation on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data
(General Data Protection Regulation), http://bit.lv/1hZGREt Accessed 17/10/2013.

118	David Omand, "NSA leaks: how to make surveillance both ethical and effective", The Guardian,
11/06/2013. http://bit.ly/1hZI4vy Accessed 17/10/2013

119	Ibid.

43

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

central, not only because the fairness of criminal systems in our democracies is too often
destabilised by such mixing, but also because a police state can easily emerge from
this120. Freedom of thought, of opinion and expression are here at stake. Bans on some
specific modalities of data mining have to be explored, along similar lines than what were
examined by the US Congress in 2003: the Data Mining Moratorium Act (S. 188)
proposed by Senator Russ Feingold's (D-WI) and the Citizens' Protection in Federal
Databases Act (S. 1484) proposed by Senator Ron Wyden's (D-OR). This has been
reactivated recently with the Amash amendment, narrowly defeated, which would have
required the NSA to limit its telephone data collection only to individuals "under
investigation".121

Recommendation 3: the EP should submit a Proposal on limitation of actions of
private contractors while keeping in mind the free circulation of the Internet
and the possibility of a European Privacy Cloud (EPC).

As it has recently been recognised by the European Commission in the memo entitled
"What does the Commission mean by secure Cloud computing services in Europe?",122
the EU needs to develop its own capacities in terms of cloud computing, in order to
guarantee what we could define as a European Privacy Cloud (EPC). It is clear that the
modalities of the U.S.-E.U. safe harbour agreement, presented by the USA as a
guarantee in terms of privacy have been gravely violated. All companies involved in the
PRISM scandal (Apple, Google, Yahoo, Facebook, etc.) were members of the safe harbour
agreement. The data protection directive regarding the access of private providers who
are routing to the US European data via cloud computing has to be revised.

A Canadian proposal may be here explored. This proposal elaborates a "route tracking
device" that proposes to the internet client to choose fast or "secure" routes for sending
emails or other communications123. Such a proposal would oblige the companies to
propose the option for all European countries internet users to keep their internal
communications and data storages in Europe. If the US companies do not propose this
option, they would be obliged to warn the visitors on their websites. European companies
may be required to do the same and to sign a code of privacy agreement respectful of
the European Charter of Human Rights. To ask to the Open sources to find way to
organise the equivalent of what is offered by the big 9 companies today is also a
possibility.

All users, whatever their nationality, should be equally protected. Internet users should
have equal right over the secrecy of their correspondence. Such a right is not contrary to
legitimate claims of the different services for their missions concerning crime and
national security.

Recommendation 4: The European Parliament should ensure that certain key
provisions in the Data Protection draft Regulation be maintained during
negotiations with Council

The recent vote in the LIBE Committee of the European Parliament on the General Data
Protection Regulation on 21 October 2013 has unveiled some key proposals as regards
data transfers to non-EU countries that still need to be confirmed during the negotiations
with member states before becoming law. Current Article 43a states that, if a third

120	B. Hudson, S. Ugelvik (2012), « Justice and Security in the 21st Century: Risks, Rights and the Rule
of Law ». Routledge. 256p.

121	Read more:	http://www.digitaltrends.com/mobile/whv-the-nsa-collects-evervones-phone-

records/#ixzz2i3coVI9Y

122	European Commission - MEMO/13/898, 15 October 2013

123	J. Obar and A. Clement (2013), 'Internet surveillance and boomerang routine,' Working Paper, July
2013, University of Toronto.

44

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

country asks a firm or organisation to disclose personal data processed in the EU, the
firm or organisation needs to get permission from the national data protection authority
and inform the person concerned before transferring any data. Failing to comply with this
safeguard implies sanctions (current Article 79 of the Regulation): for organisations,
written warnings may be issued for less serious breaches, or the organisation might be
subjected to a data protection audit; for companies the sanctions might take the form of
a fine of up to €100 million or 5% of annual worldwide turnover, whichever is greater.
When imposing these penalties, the data protection authorities would have to take into
account aggravating factors such as the duration of the breach, its negligent or repetitive
character, willingness to cooperate and the amount of damage done. It is crucial that the
European Parliament consider such provisions as 'red lines' during the inter-institutional
negotiations on the final text of the Regulation.

Recommendation 5:	The European Parliament should propose the

establishment of a policy infrastructure at EU level capable of ensuring effective
follow-up of intelligence revelations

There is a need for the European Parliament to reflect critically about the EU's
institutional capacity to deal with recurrent breaches by EU and foreign intelligence
agencies which clearly impinge on the rights and freedoms of European citizens. Lessons
should be learned from the Echelon affair to ensure that a more systematic and
sustainable policy infrastructure is put into place that can ensure genuine follow-up in the
wake of intelligence scandals.

Consideration should be given to the possibility of establishing a common model of
European cooperation on intelligence exchange and sharing between EU Member States
and with third countries, which would be particularly concerned with refusing to
cooperate in cases where the information was obtained through unlawful treatment of
the individual. The model should also foresee more legal certainty concerning the kind of
information that is exchanged, and the parameters for it to be considered as
'intelligence', as well as a common legal definition of 'law enforcement authorities' that
would clearly differentiate the roles of intelligence services and other law enforcement
(police) authorities. This common model should be closely, carefully and democratically
monitored at both the national and European levels. As previous research has
proposed,124 a 'yellow card, red card system' could be adopted, in which transmission of
tainted information in breach of the common accord would first be signalled by a warning
(a 'yellow card') and if repeated, by exclusion (a 'red card') from the information-sharing
network.

A committee at the European level led by the European Counter Terrorist Coordinator
could be set up to address possibilities for applying EU principles in the field of data
protection, privacy and collective freedoms and to propose the base for a transatlantic
digital bill of rights concerning all data subjects, whatever their nationality. In order to be
credible it should gather not only policymakers but also internet providers as well as
researchers and civil society representatives.

The participation of national parliaments should be also foreseen, in light of the Brussels
Declaration that emphasised the need to create a "European Intelligence Review
Agencies Knowledge Network" (EIRAN), with the main goal of improving democratic
accountability of the intelligence and security services in Europe. The European
Parliament could use the EP's inter-parliamentary arrangement with national parliaments

124	F. Geyer (2007), Fruit of the Poisonous Tree, op. cit.; S. Carrera et al (2012), The results of inquiries into
the CIA's programme of extraordinary rendition and secret prisons in European states in light of the new legal
framework following the Lisbon Treaty, Study for the European Parliament's Committee on Civil Liberties,
Justice and Home Affairs (LIBE), June 2012.

45

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

for sharing information on 'good' and 'bad' practices in the scrutiny of law enforcement
authorities and intelligence services and the state of affairs in domestic inquiries.125

Recommendation 6: The European Parliament should exercise its powers to
promote minimum standards set by ECtHR

The EU and the Council of Europe are not excluded from intervening in matters of
national security where they affect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
European citizens and all those affected by their government's security practices.

The European Court of Human Rights has developed a substantial body of jurisprudence
on what constitutes interference prescribed by the law in the context of secret
surveillance and information gathering which effectively establishes a set of criteria for
detertmining the lawfulness of secret surveillance and interference of communications.
The European Parliament should examine these minimum safeguards and reflect on how
further value could be given to those standards within the EU legal system in order to
ensure that they become an integral part in defining the "red line" that intelligence
services in democratic regimes cannot cross when they use large-scale surveillance.

A new study should be conducted to explore in detail the legal implications of ECtHR
jurisprudence on intelligence-related activities over the EU's Internal Security Strategy
and EU Home Affairs activities. Closer cooperation between the European Parliament and
the Council of Europe (and its Parliamentary Assembly, PACE) would be here also
welcomed.

Recommendation 7: Ensure more effective scrutiny and monitoring of EU Home
Affairs Agencies in the field of security and information exchange

There are no mechanisms in place to ensure that EU home affairs agencies such as
Europol (and Intsen in so far as it can be classified an EU 'agency') have not received,
processed or used information or intelligence that was illegally obtained by national
authorities or third countries.

The forthcoming revision of Europol's mandate should be taken as an opportunity to
address the accountability issues raised above. An independent evaluation could also be
conducted about the extent to which any EU agencies may have known or received any
sort of information relating to large-scale surveillance programmes by the EU member
states. To understand the risks of EU Home Affairs agency (indirect) involvement in
programmes of communications surveillance, a mapping could be undertaken of the
points of intersection of national (intelligence) and law enforcement agencies which may
have been involved in large-scale surveillance and the EU intelligence or information
exchange architecture. These points of intersection should be subjected to sensitive,
democratic, legal and judicial controls.

As a means to ensure democratic accountability and oversight, the EP could establish a
special (permanent) inter-parliamentary committee on EU regulatory agencies, with
special focus on EU Home Affairs agencies working in the field of security and information
exchange for law enforcement purposes. This committee could be run by the European

125 See also S. Carrera et al (2012), The results of inquiries into the CIA's programme of extraordinary
rendition and secret prisons in European states in light of the new legal framework following the Lisbon Treaty,
Study for the European Parliament's Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs (LIBE), June 2012.

46

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Parliament's LIBE, with the participation of other relevant committees and
representatives from corresponding committees of national parliaments. Its mandate
include the possibility of setting up 'confidential working groups' that would have access
to and could assess the secret/non-publicly disclosed information. It should have the
power, resources and expertise to initiate and conduct its own investigations and
inquiries, as well as full and unhindered access to the information, officials and
installations necessary to fulfil its mandate.

Recommendation 8: EP to explore the potential for an EU level protection for
whistle-blowers

It should be considered whether systematic protection for whistle-blowers could be
introduced in the EU level legal framework, potentially including strong guarantees of
immunity and asylum.

Recommendation 9: Further research should be commissioned by the European
Parliament on large-scale surveillance practices by EU member states

The evidence presented in this briefing paper opens a set of new and pressing questions
on the activites of European intelligence services and their compatibility with EU law,
demonstrating that further research is needed on this area. The European Parliament
should commission an in-depth research study to examine the specific features and
techniques of large-scale surveillance by EU member states, and their lawfulness under
current domestic legal regimes as well as their compatibility with EU legal principles and
standards.

47

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

List of academic references

A.	Amicelle (2011), The Great (Data) Bank Robbery: Terrorist Finance Tracking Program
and the "SWIFT Affair", Research Question 36, CERI, Sciences-Po.

H. Becker (1963), Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance, New York: The Free
Press;

D. Bigo (2006), Intelligence Services, Police and Democratic Control: The European and
Transatlantic Collaboration, in Bigo D., Tsoukala A., Controlling Security, Paris:
L'harmattan.

D. Bigo et al. (2011), Towards a New EU Legal Framework for Data Protection and
Privacy: Challenges, Principles and the Role of the European Parliament, Study for the
European Parliament's LIBE Committee, November 2011.

D. Bigo et al (2012), Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud, Study for
the European Parliament, PE 462.509.

C.	Bowden (2013), The US Surveillance Programmes and Their Impact on EU Citizens'
Fundamental Rights, Study for the European Parliament, PE 474.405, September 2013

D.	Campbell (1999), The state of the art in Communications Intelligence (COMINT) of
automated processing for intelligence purposes of intercepted broadband multi-language
leased or common carrier systems and its applicability to COMINT targeting and
selection, including speech recognition, Part 2/5, in: StOA (Ed.), Development of
Surveillance Technology and Risk of Abuse of Economic Information (October 1999), PE
168.184.

S.	Carrera et al (2012), The results of inquiries into the CIA's programme of
extraordinary rendition and secret prisons in European states in light of the new legal
framework following the Lisbon Treaty, Study for the European Parliament's Committee
on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs (LIBE), June 2012.

A.	Dulles (1963), The Craft of Intelligence, New York: Harper&Row.

O.	H. Gandy, Jr. (2002), "Data Mining and Surveillance in the Post-9.11 Environment",
IAMCR Data Mining, 7 November 2002.

F. Geyer (2007), 'Fruit of the Poisonous Tree Member States' Indirect Use of
Extraordinary Rendition and the EU Counter-Terrorism Strategy,' CEPS Working
Document No. 263/April 2007.

P.	Gill (2012), 'Intelligence, Threat, Risk and the Challenge of Oversight', Intelligence and
National Security, 27:2, pp. 206-22.

E.	Guild and S. Carrera (2011), 'Towards an Internal (In)security Strategy for the EU?'
CEPS Liberty and Security Series, January 2011.

K. Haggerty and R. Ericson, (2000), The Surveillant Assemblage, British Journal of
Sociology, 51(4): p. 605-622.

S. Heumann, B. Scott (2013), "Law and Policy in Internet Surveillance Programs: United
States, Great Britain and Germany", Stiftung Neue Verantwortung / Open Technology
Institute publication, September 2013.

B.	Hudson, S. Ugelvik (2012), « Justice and Security in the 21st Century: Risks, Rights
and the Rule of Law ». Routledge. 256p.

C.	Jones (2013), Secrecy reigns at the EU's Intelligence Analysis Centre, Statewatch
Analysis.

M. Klamberg, (2010), 'FRA and the European Convention on Human Rights', Nordic
Yearbook of Law and Information Technology, Bergen 2010, pp. 96-134.

48

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

D.	Lyon (2003), Surveillance as Social Sorting: Privacy, Risk and Automated
Discrimination, London: Routledge.

G. T. Marx (1989), Undercover: Police Surveillance In America, University Of California
Press.

J. Obar and A. Clement (2013), 'Internet surveillance and boomerang routine,' Working
Paper, July 2013, University of Toronto.

G. O'Donnell (2004), The Quality of Democracy: Why the Rule of Law Matters? Journal of
Democracy, Vol. 15, No. 4, October.

D. Omand (2008), Can we have the Pleasure of the Grin without Seeing the Cat? Must
the Effectiveness of Secret Agencies Inevitably Fade on Exposure to the Light?
Intelligence and National Security, Volume 23, Issue 5, pages 593-607, 2008.

J. Parkin (2012), EU Home Affairs Agencies and the Construction of EU Internal Security,
CEPS Liberty and Security Series, December 2012.

A. Wills, M. Vermeulen, H. Born, M. Scheinin, M. Wiebusch, A. Thornton (2011),
Parliamentary Oversight of Security and Intelligence Agencies in the EU, Note for the
European Parliament, PE 453.207, 15 June 2011.

D. Weller, B. Woodcock (2013) 'Internet Traffic Exchange: Market Developments and
Policy Challenges', OECD Digital Economy Papers, 207.

49

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

ANNEX 1 - The EU member states practices in the context
of the revelations of NSA large scale operations

The following Annex draws together the available evidence to shed light on potential
programmes of large-scale surveillance being conducted by the intelligence services of
EU member states. It seeks to establish whether PRISM-like surveillance programmes
exist in the EU: do surveillance programmes run by EU member states share
commonalities with those executed by the NSA? How do they compare in terms of scale,
technical features and the degree of accountability and oversight characterising their
implementation?

The section does not attempt to make a new, comprehensive assessment of the
surveillance practices of every EU member state but rather selects for in-depth
assessment five countries where existing evidence (via investigative journalism,
academic analysis or official documentation) indicates electronic surveillance practices
which go beyond traditional, targeted surveillance for intelligence purposes. These are
the UK, Sweden, France, Germany and the Netherlands. Each member state is examined
with the following criteria in mind: the basic technical features of large-scale surveillance
programmes; stated purpose of programmes, targets and types of data collected; actors
involved in collection and use, including evidence of cooperation with the private sector;
cooperation or exchange of data with foreign intelligence services, including the NSA;
legal framework and oversight governing the execution of the programme(s).

1. UK126

Of the five member states examined, evidence indicates that the UK government is
engaged in by far the most extensive large-scale surveillance activities in the EU.

Internet surveillance in the UK is primarily carried out by the agency known as the
Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), which produces signals intelligence
(SIGINT) for the UK government. GCHQ in mandated to work "in the interests of national
security, with particular reference to the defense and foreign policies of Her Majesty's
government; in the interests of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom; and in
support of the prevention and the detection of serious crime".127 In budgetary terms
GCHQ receives the greatest investment of all the UK's intelligence services
(approximately 1 billion pounds annually) and its human resources are twice the size of
the workforce of MI5 and MI6 combined (6000 staff).128

The disclosures by former Booz Allen Hamilton employee Edward Snowden and
revelations in the US and European press, particularly the Guardian newspaper, have
provided a much broader understanding of the depth and range of GCHQ's activities than
experts previously had access to. These reports describe a range of programmes and
projects linked to the large-scale access, processing and storage of data which fall within
the overarching framework of a GCHQ project named by the agency 'Mastering the
Internet' (MTI).129 Reports indicate a budget of over £1 bn devoted to the MTI project

126	Data presented here is primarily based on revelations published in press reports, testimonies to the
European Parliament Inquiry on electronic surveillance of EU citizens and the expert witness statement of
Dr. Ian Brown, Associate Director of Oxford University's Cyber Security Centre.

127	Intelligence Services Act (ISA) 1994.

128	Source: N. Hopkins, J. Borger and L. Harding (2013), 'GCHQ: inside the top secret world of Britain's

biggest	spy	agency,'	The	Guardian,	2	August	2013.

http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/02/gchq-spy-agencv-nsa-snowden.

129	Source: E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'Mastering the internet: how GCHQ set out to spy on the world
wide web,' The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/iun/21/gcha-mastering-
the-internet.

50

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

over a three year period,130 creating capacities for the intercept, storage and processing
of data on a par with, and potentially even exceeding that of, the NSA with whom it
engages in close cooperation.

1.1.	Programme(s) for large-scale surveillance

Potentially the most far-reaching of the programmes run by GCHQ within the MTI project
is the so-called Tempora Programme. According to disclosures by the Guardian
newspaper, the UK is engaged in the routine interception of undersea cables for the
purpose of capturing internet content. Reports allege that GCHQ has placed data
interceptors on approximately 200 of the UK-based fibre-optic cables that transmit
internet data into and out of the British Isles carrying data to Western Europe from
telephone exchanges and internet servers in North America.131 The Tempora programme
is estimated to be around 5 years old, having been first developed and piloted in 2009
and operational since at least early 2012.132

The technique of directly tapping the fibre-optic cables entering and exiting the UK
(known as Special Source Exploitation) appears to have given GCHQ access to
unprecedented quantities of information. In terms of scale, leaked official documents
claim that by 2012 GCHQ was able to process data from at least 46 fibre-optic cables at
any one time, giving the agency the possibility to intercept, in principal, more than 21
petabytes of data a day.133 This is estimated to have contributed to a 7000% increase in
the amount of personal data available to GCHQ from internet and mobile traffic in the
past five years and given the UK the biggest internet access in Five Eyes.134 Data is
understood to be stored at underground storage centres at GCHQ headquarters in
Cheltenham, and potentially other agency sites (GCHQ's sister base in Bude, Cornwall as
well as another unnamed base outside of the UK).135

The data intercepted and processed consists both of 'content', referring to recordings of
phone calls, content of email messages, entries on Facebook, histories of an internet
user's access to websites etc, as well as 'metacontent': data recording the means of
creation of transmitted data, the time and date of its creation, its creator, location where
created.136 Content intercepted by Tempora is kept for up to 3 days while metacontent is
stored for up to 30 days. Around 300 GCHQ and 250 NSA operative are charged with
analysing the data intercepted by Tempora.137

130	Source: C. Williams (2009), 'Jacqui's secret plan to master the internet,' The Register, 3 May 2009.
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2009/05/03/gchq mti/

131	Source: E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'GCHQ taps fibre-optic cables for secret access to world's
communications', The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/iun/21/gchq-
cables-secret-world-communications-nsa

132	Source: Ibid.

133	A petabyte is approximately 1000 terabytes, which is in turn 1000 gigabytes. The comparison made
by the Guardian was that this is equivalent to sending all the book in the British Library 192 times every
24 hours.

134	Source: P. Beaumont (2013), 'NSA leaks: US and Britain team up on mass surveillance,' The
Observer, 22 June 2013; N. Hopkins, J. Borger and L. Harding (2013), 'GCHQ: inside the top secret
world of Britain's biggest spy agency,' The Guardian, 2 August 2013.
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/02/gcha-spv-agencv-nsa-snowden.

135	Source: Statement by Duncan Campbell at the European Parliament's LIBE Committee Inquiry on
Inquiry on Electronic Mass Surveillance of EU Citizens, 1st Hearing, 5 September 2013; N. Hopkins, J.
Borger and L. Harding (2013), 'GCHQ: inside the top secret world of Britain's biggest spy agency,' The
Guardian, 2 August 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/02/gchq-spy-agency-nsa-
snowden

136	Source: E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'GCHQ taps fibre-optic cables for secret access to world's
communications', The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/iun/21/gchq-
cables-secret-world-communications-nsa.

137	Source: Ibid.

51

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

Both content and metacontent are filtered using a technique called Massive Volume
Reduction (MVR). Approximately 30% of the data is removed early in the process,
classified as 'high volume, low value' traffic (consisting for instance of peer-to-peer
music, film and computer programme downloads). The remaining data is searched using
so-called 'selectors', which can include keywords, email addresses, and phone numbers
of targeted individuals. There are approximately 40,000 such selectors identified by
GCHQ.138

The objectives underpinning this mass collection of data and the individuals targeted are
ambiguous, and as yet not clearly delineated in the documents and reported disclosures.
According to an intelligence source quoted by the Guardian, the criteria governing the
use of selectors to search and filter the data relate to 'security, terrorism, organised
crime and economic well-being.139 An internal GCHQ memo dated October 2011 stated
that: "[Our] targets boil down to diplomatic/military/commercial targets/terrorists/
organised criminals and e-crime/cyber actors".140

In principal, the UK legal framework allows Tempora only to target 'external'
communications, in other words communications between non-UK residents, or between
a UK resident and a non-UK resident. However, in practice, given that a substantial
proportion of internal UK communications is routed offshore, all internet users are
potential targets of the Tempora programme, both British citizens (and UK residents) as
well as non-British citizens and residents. As the UK is an important landing point for the
vast majority of transatlantic fibre-optic cables, the monitoring of these cables means
that a large proportion of communications from around the world would be
intercepted.141

Details concerning the logistical operation of the Tempora programme imply some
cooperation with private sector telecommunications companies. On Friday 2 August
2013, the Süddeutsche newspaper published the names of the commercial companies
cooperating with GCHQ and providing access to their customer's data within the Tempora
programme.142 The newspaper cited seven companies (BT, Vodafone Cable, Verizon
Business, Global Crossing, Level 3, Viatel and Interroute), referred to as 'intercept
partners' which together operate a large proportion of the undersea fibre-optic internet
cables.143 Allegations claim that companies are paid for logistical and technical assistance
and are obliged to cooperate under the 1984 Telecommunications Act. Spokespersons of
the companies concerned have stated that they are legally obliged to cooperate, and all
cooperation is in accordance with European and national laws.144 Allegations have also

138	The NSA has reportedly identified 31,000 selectors. Source: E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'GCHQ taps
fibre-optic cables for secret access to world's communications', The Guardian, 21 June 2013.
http://www.theauardian.com/uk/2013/iun/21/acha-cables-secret-world-communications-nsa.

139	Source: E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'GCHQ taps fibre-optic cables for secret access to world's
communications', The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theauardian.com/uk/2013/iun/21/acha-
cables-secret-world-communications-nsa

140	Source: Quoted in E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'Mastering the internet: how GCHQ set out to spy on the
world wide web,' The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theauardian.com/uk/2013/iun/21/acha-
masterina-the-internet.

141	Expert Witness Statement of Ian Brown for Bia Brother Watch and Others Re: Larae-Scale Internet
Surveillance by the UK Application No: 58170/13 to the European Court of Human Riahts.

142	Source: J. Goetz and F. Obermaier (2013), Snowden enthüllt Namen der spähenden Telekomfirmen,
Süddeutsche Zeitung, 2 Auaust 2013. The paper's exposé was based on information it had seen on
internal GCHQ powerpoint slide from 2009.

143	Source: J. Goetz and F. Obermaier (2013), Snowden enthüllt Namen der spähenden Telekomfirmen,
Süddeutsche Zeitung, 2 Auaust 2013. The paper's exposé was based on information it had seen on
internal GCHQ powerpoint slide from 2009.

144	Source: J. Ball, L. Hardina and J. Garside (2013), BT and Vodafone amona telecoms companies
passina details to GCHQ, The Guardian, 2 Auaust 2013.

52

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

been made that GCHQ has accessed cables without the consent or knowledge of the
companies that own or operate them.145

The Guardian reports on the Tempora programme have been verified and deemed
credible by external experts, such as Ian Brown, member of the UK Information
Commissioner's Technology Reference Panel. According to Dr. Brown's witness statement
in the application to the European Court of Human Rights Big Brother Watch and others
vs. the United Kingdom:

The Guardian reports appear to me to be credible. Some of the details have been
confirmed by the US government, and by previous leaks (including by statements by
former senior NSA officials such as William Binney.) Much of the technology used (such
as optical splitter equipment) is commercially available. The budgetary resources
required fit within the publicly known budgets of the UK and US intelligence
agencies.146

Another key dimension of GCHQ's large-scale surveillance activity that has emerged from
the Guardian's disclosures is the UK's participation in the PRISM Programme.

Following press revelations concerning the US surveillance activities and programmes
operated by the NSA (see Section One of this study), the Guardian reported that the US
shares information it obtains via the PRISM programme with the UK authorities.
According to reports, GCHQ has had access to the data gathered under the PRISM
programme since June 2010 and generated 197 intelligence reports from this data in
2012. It has been subsequently presumed that GCHQ also has access to wider
information obtained by NSA surveillance activities under section 1881a, including
material that is directly intercepted from so-called 'upstream collection' - the direct
interception of communications as they pass through fibre optic cables and electronic
infrastructures of telecommunication companies or online service providers in the US
(and potentially around the world).147

Privacy advocacy groups and experts have claimed that through their access to US
programmes such as PRISM, the UK is able to obtain information about UK citizens' or
residents' internal communications, that would otherwise be out of bounds to UK
intelligence agencies without first obtaining a warrant under the Regulation of
Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (RIPA). The allegations that this cooperation has
effectively allowed the UK authorities to circumvent the UK legal regime have been
investigated by the ISC and are further discussed in Section 1.3 below.

Leaked documents have also cited a decryption programme named 'Edgehill'. On 6
September 2013, the Guardian published a report alleging that GCHQ has been
cooperating with a 10 year programme by the NSA against encryption technologies.148
According to documents seen by the Guardian, a GCHQ pilot programme attempted to
establish a system which could identify encrypted traffic from its internet cable tapping
programmes (e.g. Tempora). Reports indicate that the decryption programme, named
'Edgehill,' was seen as critical in maintaining the strategic advantage that GCHQ has
gained with its Tempora Programme, as large internet providers began increasingly to
encrypt their communications traffic.

GCHQ documents show that Edgehill's initial aim was to decode the encrypted traffic
certified by three major (unnamed) internet companies and 30 types of Virtual Private

145	Source: Ibid. See also Statement by Duncan Campbell at the European Parliament's LIBE Committee
Inquiry on Inquiry on Electronic Mass Surveillance of EU Citizens, 1st Hearing, 5 September 2013.

146	Source: Expert Witness Statement of Ian Brown for Big Brother Watch and Others Re: Large-Scale
Internet Surveillance by the UK Application No: 58170/13 to the European Court of Human Rights.

147	Source: Privacy International submission to the Investigatory Powers Tribunal, 'Statement of
Grounds', 8 July 2013, available at: www.privacvinternational.org

148	Source: J. Ball, J. Borger and G. Greenwald (2013), 'Revealed: how US and UK spy agencies defeat
internet privacy and security,' The Guardian, 6 September 2013.

53

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

Network (VPN) - used by businesses to provide secure remote access to their systems. It
is reported that by 2015, GCHQ hoped to have cracked the codes used by 15 major
internet companies, and 300 VPNs. The Guardian also claims that analysts on the
Edgehill project were working on ways into the networks of major webmail providers as
part of the decryption project.

Documents leaked by Edward Snowden have also indicated that the UK has engaged in
GCHQ-coordinated offensive operations aimed at diplomatic or economic espionage.
Internal GCHQ powerpoint slides published by the Guardian in June 2013 indicated that
GCHQ intercepted the phones and monitored internet use of Foreign politicians and
diplomats taking part in two G20 summit meetings in London in 2009.

In September 2013, Der Spiegel published revelations that GCHQ coordinated a project
codenamed 'Operation Socialist' which saw a cyber-attack against the Belgian telecoms
company Belgacom.149 During the European Parliament hearing of 3 October, Belgacom
vice-President Geert Standaert stated that the 'spyware', discovered in June 2013, had
penetrated 124 out of its 26,000 IT systems.150 Belgacom executives indictaed that the
scale and sophistication of the attack implied a state actor, but neither conformed nor
denied allegations alluding to GCHQ's involvement.151

In addition to the main disclosures relating to GCHQ large-scale surveillance activities
discussed above, other programmes about which less is known, have come to light.
These include the so-called 'Global Telecoms Exploitation' programme which is
understood to also be conducted through tapping fibre-optic cables and which allows
GCHQ to handle 600 million 'telephone events' each day.152

Further, documents leaked to the Guardian reveal a "mobile" project designed to
exploit mobile devices, collecting voice, sms and geo-locations as well as the additional
functionalities that come with smartphones, such as emails, internet searches and social
media posts. Internal GCHQ documents underscore the importance of this project in
order to keep pace with the increase use of smart phones which is likely to see 90% of
all internet traffic coming from mobile phones by 2015.

According to the Guardian, it had seen documents which make it clear that "GCHQ was
now capable of "attacking" hundreds of apps, and a "mobile capability map" from June
last year stated the agency had found ways of looking at the search patterns, emails and
conversations on many commonly used phone services."153

1.2.	Cooperation with foreign intelligence services

Evidence that has come to public attention over the past four months indicates a close
working relationship between the NSA and GCHQ on mass cyber surveillance activities.154

149	Source: Spiegel online (2013), 'Belgacom Attack: Britain's GCHQ Hacked Belgian Telecoms Firm,' Der
Spiegel, 20 September 2013.

150	Source: European Parliament's LIBE Committee Inquiry on Inquiry on Electronic Mass Surveillance of
EU Citizens, 3 October 2013.

151Source: European Parliament's LIBE Committee Inquiry on Inquiry on Electronic Mass Surveillance of
EU Citizens, 3 October 2013.

152	Source: E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'GCHQ taps fibre-optic cables for secret access to world's
communications', The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/21/gchq-
cables-secret-world-communications-nsa. Also Expert Witness Statement of Ian Brown for Big Brother
Watch and Others Re: Large-Scale Internet Surveillance by the UK Application No: 58170/13 to the
European Court of Human Rights.

153	Source: E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'Mastering the internet: how GCHQ set out to spy on the world
wide web,' The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/21/gchq-mastering-
the-internet.

154	Source: N. Hopkins and J. Borger (2013), 'Exclusive: NSA pays £100m in secret funding for GCHQ,'
The Guardian, 1 August 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/aug/01/nsa-paid-gchq-
spying-edward-snowden.

54

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

This concerns both data and intelligence sharing but also in the collaborative
development of pilot programmes and technologies. For example, early internal GCHQ
documents describing Tempora initially referred to this programme as "a joint GCHQ/NSA
research initiative."155 Reports also allege close cooperation between GCHQ and the NSA
in the development of decryption technologies.156

In terms of data and intelligence sharing, the UK appears to conduct a substantial and
routine reciprocal relationship of data exchange with the US authorities. Reflecting the
details of the UK's access to PRISM data outlined in Section 2.1.2. above, a UK
government paper that set out the views of GCHQ in the wake of the 2010 strategic
defence and security review admitted that 60% of the UK's high-value intelligence "is
based on either NSA end-product or derived from NSA collection" (end product referring
to official reports that are distillations of raw intelligence.)157

Similarly, the UK is reported to provide access to the data collected through the Tempora
and other programmes, available to the NSA, with Guardian reports implying that while
the UK had the means to collect huge amounts of data through Tempora and its access
to undersea internet cables, the NSA could provide the resources (850,000 operatives)
and technologies to process and analyse that data. An internal report explained that
"GCHQ and NSA avoid processing the same data twice and proactively seek to converge
technical solutions and processing architectures."158

The degree of cooperation between the two agencies are reflected in revelations exposing
the details of the NSA payments to GCHQ in the last years. The Guardian reports that the
payments, which are set out in GCHQ's annual "investment portfolios" seen by the
newspaper, show that the US government has paid at least £100m to the UK spy agency
GCHQ over the last three years. The papers show that the NSA gave GCHQ £22.9m in
2009. The following year the NSA's contribution increased to £39.9m, of which £17.2m
was allocated for the agency's Mastering the Internet project. The NSA also paid £15.5m
towards redevelopments at GCHQ's sister site in Bude, Cornwall, which intercepts
communications from the transatlantic cables that carry internet traffic. In 2011/12 the
NSA paid another £34.7m to GCHQ.159

1.3.	Legal framework and oversight

1.3.1.	Legal framework

Surveillance of communications in the UK are carried out within the legal framework
established by the UK's 2000 Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (RIPA). The
warranting process under RIPA falls under two separate regimes, depending on the types
of data accessed. Interception of content is authorised by a warrant signed by the
Secretary of State specifying an individual or premises and is valid for 3-6 months.160
Access to "communications data" is regulated under a separate Chapter of RIPA and

155	Source: E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'Mastering the internet: how GCHQ set out to spy on the world
wide web,' The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/iun/21/gcha-mastering-
the-internet.

156	Source: J. Ball, J. Borger and G. Greenwald (2013), 'Revealed: how US and UK spy agencies defeat
internet privacy and security,' The Guardian, 6 September 2013.

157	Source: N. Hopkins and J. Borger (2013), 'Exclusive: NSA pays £100m in secret funding for GCHQ,'

The	Guardian,	1	August	2013.	http://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/aug/01/nsa-paid-gcha-

spying-edward-snowden

158	Source: Quoted in E. MacAskill et al. (2013), 'Mastering the internet: how GCHQ set out to spy on the
world wide web,' The Guardian, 21 June 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/iun/21/gcha-
mastering-the-internet.

159	Source: N. Hopkins and J. Borger (2013), 'Exclusive: NSA pays £100m in secret funding for GCHQ,'

The	Guardian,	1	August	2013.	http://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/aug/01/nsa-paid-gcha-

spying-edward-snowden.

160	Part 1, Chapter 1 of RIPA, 2000.

55

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

permits some agencies to self-authorise access to some of this data.161 "Communications
data" is here defined in relatively vague terms and refers to 'traffic data' that includes
identities of individuals and equipment as well as location details, routing information and
signaling information.162

An interception warrant specifying an individual or premises is not needed where UK
authorities intercept communications external to the UK. In this scenario, an authorising
certificate from the Secretary of State is required which describes the
nature/classification of material to be examined.163 It is under the latter legal mechanism
by which data exchange with the US, including that implicated in the PRISM porgramme,
as well as Tempora Programme activities are understood to have been authorised.164

In addition, under the Telecommunication Act 1984 the Secretary of State may give
providers of public electronic networks "directions of a general character... in the interests
of national security or relations with the government of a country or territory outside the
United Kingdom".165

Although RIPA is stated to be compatible with the ECHR and includes explicit tests of
proportionality and necessity before communications content and metadata may be
accessed, however, experts have noted that "the standards according to which these
tests of proportionality are carried out are mainly secret, and applied by the
government's legal advisers and the Secretary of State, with limited oversight."166

1.3.2.	Oversight

The UK's intelligence oversight regime is composed of an Intelligence and Security
Committee, an Interception of Communications Commissioner (IoCC) and the
Investigatory Powers Tribunal.

On 7 June 2013, the Intelligence and Security Committee (ISC)167 issued a statement
indicating that it had launched an investigation into allegations that the agency
circumvented UK law by using the NSA's PRISM programme to access the content of
private communications within the UK without proper authorisation. On 17 July 2013 the
Chairman of the Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament, the Rt Hon Sir
Malcolm Rifkind MP, issued a follow-up statement regarding the outcome of those
investigations.168 The statement concluded that, after taking detailed evidence from
GCHQ, any suggested allegations are 'unfounded' and complied with the legal safeguards

161	Part 1, Chapter 2 of RIPA, 2000. See also Expert Witness Statement of Ian Brown for Big Brother
Watch and Others Re: Large-Scale Internet Surveillance by the UK Application No: 58170/13 to the
European Court of Human Rights. According to RIPA, communications data can be accessed by a range
of government agencies on a broad set of grounds, including in the interests of national security,
preventing or detecting crime or disorder, economic wellbeing and so on, and includes any purpose
specified in an order made by the Secretary of State. See S.22(2) RIPA.

162	S. 21 (4) RIPA

163	S.8(4) RIPA

164	Source: Expert Witness Statement of Ian Brown for Big Brother Watch and Others Re: Large-Scale
Internet Surveillance by the UK Application No: 58170/13 to the European Court of Human Rights.

165	S.94 Telecommunication Act.

166	Source: Expert Witness Statement of Ian Brown for Big Brother Watch and Others Re: Large-Scale
Internet Surveillance by the UK Application No: 58170/13 to the European Court of Human Rights.

167	The Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament (ISC) is a statutory committee of Parliament
that has responsibility for oversight of the UK intelligence community. The Committee was originally
established by the Intelligence Services Act 1994. The Committee oversees the intelligence and security
activities of the UK, including the policies, expenditure, administration and operations of the Security
Service (MI5), the Secret Intelligence Service (MI6) and the Government Communications Headquarters
(GCHQ). The Committee consists of nine Members drawn from both Houses of Parliament.

168	Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament, Statement on GCHQ's Alleged Interception of
Communications under the US PRISM Programme, 17 July 2013, available at:
http://isc.independent.gov.uk/news-archive/17july2013

56

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

set out in RIPA. The ISC maintained that "in each case" that it examined, GCHQ had a
warrant for interception in accordance with RIPA, although the terms of those warrants
have not been published. Experts have concluded from the ISC's public statements, that
it was not previously aware of the PRISM Programme. While the ISC concluded that
GCHQ has not circumvented the law, it nevertheless acknowledged the need 'to consider
further whether the current statutory framework governing access to private
communications remains adequate.'

An Investigatory Powers Tribunal, appointed from current or former senior members of
the judiciary, also exists to explore complaints covering the eligibility of GCHQ activities
under RIPA. Both the UK charity Privacy International and the civil rights group Liberty
have submitted claims to the IPT following the revelations of GCHQ's activities in PRISM
and Tempora.169 However, this body has not in the past demonstrated a strong oversight
function of GCHQ.170

169	Privacy International submission to the Investigatory Powers Tribunal, 'Statement of Grounds', 8 July
2013, available at: www.privacvinternational.org

170	In 2004 the IPT received dealt with 115 cases in which it found no breach of RIPA or the Human
Rights Act 1998. In leaked documents there are implications that GCHQ did not take this oversight
mechanism particularly seriously, stating in internal documents leaked to the Guardian newspaper that
"so far they have always found in our favour." (Guardian - GCHQ taps fibre optic cables)

57

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

2.	Sweden171

According to revelations by investigative journalists and experts consulted for the
purpose of this study, Sweden is becoming an increasingly important partner of the
global intelligence network. Signals intelligence operations in Sweden are the
responsibility of the National Defence Radio Establishment (FRA). In recent years, reports
have emerged which allege that FRA has engaged in operations and programmes for the
mass collection of data, with features that resemble in part those pursued by the US'
NSA and the UK's GCHQ.

2.1.	Programme(s) for large-scale surveillance

Since five years, there have been reports of FRA accessing data traffic crossing its
borders.172 In 2008 the TV broadcaster SVT reported that the FRA was
collecting/receiving data from the Baltic states and forwarding in bulk to the USA, based
on the testimony of a FRA whistleblower.173 These allegations were recently restated
during Duncan Campbell's testimony to the European Parliament Inquiry on Electronic
Mass Surveillance of EU Citizens of 5 September 2013, where he alleged that while the
Forsvarets radioanstalt has been running satellite interception facilities for many years,
Sweden's new internet laws passed in 2009 (FRA law) authorised the agency to monitor
all cable bound communications traffic into and out of Sweden, including emails, text
messages and telephone calls. FRA is now alleged to engage in intercepting and storing
communications data from fibre-optic cables crossing Swedish borders from the Baltic
sea.174

The evidence indicates that FRA has been running operations for the 'upstream' collection
of private data - collecting both the content of messages as well as metadata of
communications crossing Swedish borders. The metadata is retained in bulk and stored
in a database known as 'Titan' for a period of 18 months.175

It is understood that interception of these fibre-optic cables involves a legal obligation on
communications service providers to transfer all cable communication crossing Swedish
borders to specific "interaction points", where the communications service providers
surrender the data to the state.176

171	The information gathered on the large-scale surveillance practices of Sweden is based primarily on the
expert input of Dr. Mark Klamberg, Uppsala University as well as press articles, and official
documentation.

172	Source: N. Nielsen (2013), 'EU asks for answers on UK snooping programme', EU Observer, 26 June
2013.

173	Source: M. Klamberg, (2010), 'FRA and the European Convention on Human Rights', Nordic Yearbook
of Law and Information Technology, Bergen 2010, pp. 96-134.

174	Source: Statement by Duncan Campbell at the European Parliament's LIBE Committee Inquiry on
Inquiry on Electronic Mass Surveillance of EU Citizens, 1st Hearing, 5 September 2013; A. Tomkvist
(2013), 'Bildt: surveillance in Sweden "not like Prism"', The Local, 13 June 2013.

175	Source: M. Klamberg, (2010), 'FRA and the European Convention on Human Rights', Nordic Yearbook
of Law and Information Technology, Bergen 2010, pp. 96-134.

176	Source: M. Klamberg, (2010), 'FRA and the European Convention on Human Rights', Nordic Yearbook
of Law and Information Technology, Bergen 2010, pp. 96-134.

58

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Figure 2. Diagram illustrating how the FRA processes communication and
information

Sect on 1 (1 ) and (2)

SFS 2008:717
(foreign policy terrorism etc)

Section 1 (3)
SFS 2008:717
(auxiliary operations)

Government and agencies
give general directions
Sections 4(1) and 5

Government gives
general directions
Section 4(2)

Report Database
Section 4, SFS 2007:261

Targeting Database wiLIl search concepts
Section 6, SFS 2007:261

Analysis Database
Section 3, SFS 2007.261

Source Database
Section 2, SFS 2007:261

Signal =nvlrormcit
Database

Section 5. SFS 2007:261

Database for
Open Sources

Transfer of a I cable communication
Chapter6 section 19(a), SFS 2003:689

Report to client

FRA defines search

concepts subject to

Court approval

Interaction point

Fitenng

controle*! by the Inspection

for Defence Intetigence

Iri ■

Content data

Traffic data

Commumcalionin

cables crossing the

Transfer to

banters

partners

Source: M. Nilsson, M. Klamberg and A. Petersson, 2008.

Concerning the profile of individuals targeted by the FRA's mass data interception
programme, the initial targets again appear to be indiscriminate. As in the UK, the bulk
retention of data is, under the Swedish legal regime, only meant to cover
communications entering or exiting Swedish borders and not internal communications.
However, internal communications that have been routed through nodes based outside
Swedish territory are likely to also be classed as 'foreign' communications and retained
for analysis. The Swedish legislative framework regulating the collection of signals
intelligence provides that if there is uncertainty whether data is foreign or domestic, the
data may be collected and retained.177

Final (processed) intelligence, described as "reports to clients" is discriminate and does
not include citizens in general. The legislation differentiates between 'defence intelligence
operations' and 'auxiliary operations.' Defence intelligence operations concern a relatively
small faction of the communications that is deemed to directly relate to external military
threats, international terrorism and similar phenomena. The content of such
communications associated to such threats is selected and reserved for detailed analysis.
By contrast, the 'auxiliary operations' - which make up the lion's share of
communications intercepted, is analysed as metadata, not content, and are not intended
for generating intelligence reports to FRA's clients.178

However, academic experts argue that the division between these modes of processing
these two kinds of data is not clear-cut. Dr. Klamberg states that this division:

177	Section 2(a) of the Act 2008:717 on signals intelligence.

178	Prop. (Government Bill) 2006/07:63, En anpassad forsvarsunderrattelseverksamhet (Adapted Defence
Intelligence Operations): http://www.regeringen.se/content/1/c6/07/83/67/2ee1ba0a.pdf

59

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

"...creates the impression that a wall has been erected where the large amounts of
traffic data [metadata] collected through the auxiliary operations is used purely for
some abstract technical matters and not for intelligence purposes. This is a
misconception."179

This misconception is due to the fact that the preparatory works for the Swedish law on signals
intelligence state that since the auxiliary operations "aim to facilitate the defence intelligence
operations it would not be incompatible with the purpose for which the data is collected that the
data is also used to some extent in the defence intelligence operations."180

Second, the preparatory works explain that reports to clients may involve extensive descriptions of
meta-data patterns and therefore, despite being intended for auxiliary operations, may also be
used for defence intelligence purposes.181

While there is no explicit statement as to which national entities receive the data or
resulting intelligence drawn from this programme, to the Swedish legislative framework,
data collected by the FRA may be shared with the following 'customers':182

1)	the Government offices (Regeringskansliet),

2)	National Police Board (Rikspolisstyrelsen - RPS) which includes the National
Bureau of Investigation and the Secret Service,

3)	the Swedish Agency for Non-Proliferation and Export Controls (Inspektionen for
strategiska produkter - ISP),

4)	the Defence forces (Forsvarsmakten),

5)	Swedish Defence Materiel Administration (Forsvarets materielverk - FMV),

6)	Swedish Defence Research Agency (Totalforsvarets forskningsinstitut - FOI),

7)	Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency (Myndigheten for samhallsskydd och
beredskap - MSB)

8)	Swedish Customs (Tullverket)

2.2.	Cooperation with foreign intelligence services

There is evidence that FRA may be sharing substantial quantities of the data it collects
with foreign intelligence services including the NSA. The Swedish legislation allows for
the bulk transfer of data to other states if authorised by the Government.183 Reports from
media, experts as well as government statements indicate that Swedish authorities have
made use of this possibility through exchanges of large amounts of raw data with the US
as well as the Baltic states.184

Duncan Campbell, during his testimony to the European Parliament hearing on 5
September 2013 stated that Sweden's FRA has become a new and important partner of
Five Eyes, by providing major satellite and undersea cable interception arrangements,
stating that FRA "is deemed, according to the documents, to be the biggest collaborating

179	Source: Expert input by Dr. Mark Klamberg, Uppsala University. See also M. Klamberg, (2010), 'FRA
and the European Convention on Human Rights', Nordic Yearbook of Law and Information Technology,
Bergen 2010, pp. 96-134.

180	Source: Prop. (Government Bill) 2006/07:46, Personuppgiftsbehandling hos Försvarsmakten och
Försvarets radioanstalt (Processing of Personal Data by the Armed Forces and the National Defence
Radio Establishment):

http://www.regeringen.se/content/1/c6/07/73/05/7ac2933f.pdf

181	Source: SOU (Swedish Government Official Reports) 2009:66, Signalspaning för polisiära behov
(Signal Intelligence for Law Enforcement Purposes):
http://www.regeringen.se/content/17c6/12/99/11/e20e1ef6.pdf

182	Section 9 Förordning (2007:261) om behandling av personuppgifter i Försvarets radioanstalts
försvarsunderrättelse- och utvecklingsverksamhet (Decree 2007:261 on processing of personal data by
the FRA)

183	Section 9 Act 2008:717 on signals intelligence.

184	NyTeknik, FRA:s metoder granskas efter ny avlyssningsskandal, 27 August 2008. Cited in M.
Klamberg, (2010), 'FRA and the European Convention on Human Rights', Nordic Yearbook of Law and
Information Technology, Bergen 2010, pp. 96-134.

60

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

partner of GCHQ outside the English speaking countries." Code-named 'Sardine'. he
highlighted that Sweden makes an important contribution to the UK-USA Five Eyes
organisation, having access to cables that were hitherto inaccessible (those from the
Baltic states and Russia).

In a statement following the revelations by Campbell, Defence Minister Karin Enstrom
said Sweden's intelligence exchange with other countries is "critical for our security" and
that "intelligence operations occur within a framework with clear legislation, strict
controls, and under parliamentary oversight."185 Likewise a FRA spokesperson has
acknowledged that the FRA shares data with other countries, but declined to specify
which countries or to provide further details of the types of data shared.186 Similarly,
there is no indication of whether Sweden has been the recipient of data from other
states, including data from the NSA's PRISM and other mass surveillance programmes.

2.3.	Legal framework and oversight

2.3.1.	Legal framework

The legal authorisation for Sweden signals intelligence gathering operations are issued by
an intelligence court (Underrattelsedomstolen - UNDOM). However, according to the
legislative framework governing the issuing of warrants - namely Act 2008:717 on
signals intelligence within defence intelligence operations, Act 2009:966 on the
Intelligence Court, and Decree 2009:968 with instructions for the Intelligence court -
warrants can be sweeping and are not limited to a specific individual.187

2.3.2.	Oversight

The surveillance activities of the FRA are monitored by a national oversight body, the
Inspection for Defence Intelligence Operations (Statens inspektion for
forsvarsunderrattelseverksamheten - SIUN) which is composed of representatives from
the Government and Opposition parties.188

However, academic experts have critiqued the weak system of checks and balances when
it comes to Swedish collection of signals intelligence. With regard to the UNDOM and the
SIUN, Dr. Mark Klamberg contends that:

All of these institutions are under very tight control of the Government, an entity that
can issue requests for signals intelligence operations. The intelligence court has one
chief judge, one or two deputy chief judges. The judges are appointed by the
Government. One of the three nominees for the next chief judge is currently the chief
legal advisor at the Ministry of Defence. The current head of the signals intelligence
agency was previously the chief legal advisor at the Ministry of Defence when the
legislation was drafted. The members of SIUN do represent different political parties
but are appointed by the Government and report to the Government. Most of the

185	Source: Quoted in D. Landes (2013), 'Sweden's Spy Links 'deeply troubling', The Local, 6 September
2013.

186	Source: N. Nielsen (2013), 'EU asks for answers on UK snooping programme', EU Observer, 26 June
2013.

187	Expert input by Dr. Mark Klamberg, Uppsala University. See Lag (2008:717) om signalspaning i
försvarsunderrättelseverksamhet (Act 2008:717 on signals intelligence within defence intelligence
operations), section 4(a); Lag (2009:966) om Försvarsunderrättelsedomstol (Act 2009:966 on
Intelligence court); Förordning (2009:968) med instruktion för Försvarsunderrättelsedomstolen (Decree
2009:968) with instructions for the Intelligence court). For further information on the Swedish legal
framework covering communications surveillance, see M. Klamberg, (2010), 'FRA and the European
Convention on Human Rights', Nordic Yearbook of Law and Information Technology, Bergen 2010, pp.
96-134.

188	Lag (2008:717) om signalspaning i försvarsunderrättelseverksamhet (Act 2008:717 on signals
intelligence within defence intelligence operations), Sections 10 and (10(a); Förordning (2009:969) med
instruktion för Statens inspektion för försvarsunderrättelseverksamheten (Decree 2009:969 with
instructions for the Inspection for Defence Intelligence Operations).

61

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

members of SIUN are former parliamentarians, which weakens the parliamentary
oversight in comparison to a system where the responsibility for oversight is
conducted by a committee of parliament, i.e. parliamentarians in office. All in all, the
Swedish system of checks and balances is weak when it comes to signals
intelligence.189

189	Source: M. Klamberg (2013), Blogpost on EU Metadata Collection, Lawfare, 29 September 2013, at:
http://www.lawfareblog.com/2013/09/mark-klamberg-on-eu-metadata-collection/

62

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

3.	France190

Since 2008 France has been constantly improving its architecture for the large-scale
collection of data, with the main intelligence agency in France, the DGSE (Direction
générale de la sécurité extérieure) increasing its foreign intelligence capabilities in recent
years.191 A report of 30 April 2013 by the French National Assembly highlighted the fact
that:

Since 2008, progress has been made in terms of pooling of capabilities, in particular
concerning electro-magnetic intelligence activities operated by the DGSE to benefit the
entire intelligence community.192

In this report, the French MPs also suggested strengthening the data collection structure
of the DGSE and the links between all levels of intelligence.193

Experts consulted for this study claim that France now ranks fifth in the world of
metadata collection after the USA, Great Britain, Israel and China and runs the second
most important intelligence data collection and processing centre in Europe after the UK.
Claims of this nature have been made publicly by Bernard Barbier, a Technical Director at
the DGSE, in 2010.194

3.1.	Programme(s) for large-scale surveillance

Reportedly, France's communications surveillance and collection architecture rests
primarily on a supercomputer operated by the DGSE in Paris.195 This super computer
intelligence centre, allegedly installed on three levels in the basement of the DGSE
headquarters, is reported to be capable of collecting, processing and storing dozens of
petabytes of data. Data is intercepted and collected by approximately twenty interception
sites located on both national and overseas territory, comprised of both satellite stations
and interception of fibre-optic submarine cables.196

In February and March 2013 the French National Assembly's Committee on National
Defence and Armed Forces conducted hearings during which the heads of the main
French intelligence services all confirmed the existence of a metadata intelligence centre
located at the DGSE capable of intercepting and processing internet flows, social network
and phone communications.197 For instance, on 20 February 2013, the then Head of the

190	The data presented here was gathered on the basis of news articles and official documents and
complemented by an interview with an expert academic source who wishes to remain anonymous.

191	Source: Assemblée Nationale (2013), Rapport relatif à l'activité de la délégation parlementaire au
renseignement pour l'année 2012, Rapport n° 1012 par Mme Patricia ADAM, Députée, Délégation
parlementaire au renseignement, 30 April 2013, available at: www.assemblee-nationale.fr/14/rap-
off/i1012.asp

192 Assemblée Nationale (2013), Rapport relatif à l'activité de la délégation parlementaire au
renseignement pour l'année 2012, Rapport n° 1012 par Mme Patricia ADAM, Députée, Délégation
parlementaire au renseignement, 30 April 2013, available at: www.assemblee-nationale.fr/14/rap-
off/i1012.asp (the original text states « depuis 2008, des progrès ont été réalisés en matière de
mutualisation des capacités, notamment en ce qui concerne le renseignement d'origine
électromagnétique, opéré par la DGSE au profit de l'ensemble de la communauté du renseignement. »)

193	Ibid., pt. II.

194	Source: Speech by Bernard Barbier on 30 September 2010 at the French Association of Reservists for
Ciphering and Information Security. His remarks were reported in the following specialised blog article:
http://bugbrother.blog.lemonde.fr/2010/10/02/frenchelon-la-dgse-est-en-1ere-division

195	Source: J. Follorou and F. Johannes (2013), 'Révélations sur le Big Brother français,' Le Monde, 4 July
2013.

196	Source: J. Follorou and F. Johannes (2013), 'Révélations sur le Big Brother français,' Le Monde, 4 July
2013.

197	See Assemblée Nationale (2013), Commission de la défense nationale et des forces armées,
Comptes-rendus n° 52, 54, 55, 56, 59 et 62 des réunions du 12 février, 13 février, 19 février, 20 février,
26 février et 13 mars 2013 respectivement, available on the following website: www.assemblee-
nationale.fr/14/cr-cdef/12-13/index.asp

63

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

DGSE, Erard Corbin de Mangoux, alluded to France's communications surveillance
capabilities when he stated before the Committee that:

Regarding the technical means, we have at our disposal the entire capabilities for
electro-magnetic intelligence. Following the recommendations of the 2008 White
Paper, we have developed an important apparatus for intercepting Internet flows.198

Data storage appears to relate primarily to metadata from phone and internet use.
Concerning the use of this information, evidence indicates that the metadata centre
operated by DGSE forms an 'intelligence platform' which feeds a range of intelligence,
defence and law enforcement bodies within France. The following six agencies have been
cited as 'customers' of the DGSE metadata bank (named "mutualisation infrastructure"
by French officials):199

•	National Directorate of Customs Intelligence and Investigations (DNRED),
responsible for carrying out investigations on smuggling, counterfeit money and
customs fraud;

•	Directorate for Defence Protection and Security (DPSD), responsible for military
counter-espionage;

•	Directorate of Military Intelligence (DRM), tasked with centralising all military
intelligence information;

•	Central Directorate of Interior Intelligence (DCRI), soon to be replaced by the
General Direction of Interior Security (DGSI), responsible for counter-espionage
and counter-terrorism;

•	TRACFIN service (Intelligence Analysis and Action against Clandestine Financial
Circuits), responsible for the fight against illegal financial operations, money
laundering and terrorism financing.

•	The intelligence arm of the Police Prefecture of Paris

According to reports from Le Monde newspaper, these services send a request to the
DGSE and the DGSE searches the database on a hit/no-hit basis. They then forward
intelligence reports on the basis of the data analysed to the client agencies.200 This is
allegedly carried out routinely, discreetly and without any form of parliamentary
control.201 According to a French Senate report, this logic of "mutualisation" is a
longstanding one:

...the logic of pooling of resources between services has been continued for several
years. Therefore, the DGSE is specialised in communication interception and
cryptography to the benefit of the entire intelligence community. The Directorate of
Military Intelligence (DRM) is in charge of the observation satellites and radar signal
surveillance. Approximately 80% of the annual budget of the DGSE is invested in
projects linked to the other intelligence agencies.202

198	Source: Hearing of Érard Corbin de Mangoux, Director-General of the DGSE, on 20 February 2013,
before the French National Assembly's Committee on National Defence and Armed Forces. See
Assemblée Nationale (2013), Commission de la défense nationale et des forces armées, Compte-rendu
n° 56, available on www.assemblee-nationale.fr/14/cr-cdef/12-13/c1213056.asp. The original text
states: « S'agissant des moyens techniques, nous disposons de l'ensemble des capacités de
renseignement d'origine électromagnétique (ROEM). À la suite des préconisations du Livre blanc de
2008, nous avons pu développer un important dispositif d'interception des flux Internet. »

199	Source: J. Follorou and F. Johannes (2013), 'Révélations sur le Big Brother français,' Le Monde, 4 July
2013.

200	Source: J. Follorou and F. Johannes (2013), 'Révélations sur le Big Brother français,' Le Monde, 4 July
2013.

201	Source: Input by anonymous expert.

202	See Sénat (2013), Projet de loi de finances pour 2013 - Défense : environnement et prospective de la
politique de défense, Avis n° 150 (2012-2013) de MM. Jeanny LORGEOUX et André TRILLARD, 22
November 2012, paragraph III a) 1) d) available at: www.senat.fr/rap/a12-150-5/a12-150-5.html
(original text: « Cet effort s'effectue dans la logique de mutualisation des moyens entre services retenue
depuis plusieurs années. Ainsi, la DGSE est spécialisée sur l'interception des communications et la
cryptologie, au bénéfice de l'ensemble de la communauté du renseignement. La direction du
renseignement militaire (DRM) met en oeuvre quant à elle les satellites d'observation et les moyens

64

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

There are currently no confirmed reports or evidence that agreements exist between the
French intelligence services and French telecommunications operators such as SFR,
Bouygues, Orange etc. exist giving access to data traffic.203

3.2.	Cooperation with foreign intelligence services

The French intelligence services engage in wide cooperation with foreign intelligence
services. During the above-mentioned hearing, Head of DGSE Erard Corbin de Mangoux
declared before the French Parliament that the Agency was working with more than 200
foreign services, among which 50 formed part of the "second circle" engaged in 'frequent'
collaboration, while 10 were considered part of a "first circle" engaged in intense
cooperation. The states with which the DGSE engages were not named, nor the nature of
the cooperation detailed beyond a reference to joint analysis of information and
research.204 He added that, on the initiative of the USA, western intelligence services
have set up a database allowing each nation to immediately get access to all the
information gathered.205

These statements supplement revelations from 2005 that, according to disclosures by the
Washington Post, France has been hosting a secret intelligence centre in Paris named
"Alliance Base" where six countries, namely USA, UK, France, Germany, Canada and
Australia routinely exchange information.206 It was reported that Alliance Base is headed
by a French general assigned to the DGSE and hosts case officers from Britain, France,
Germany, Canada, Australia and the United States. Alliance base is believed to have
ended in 2009 due to tensions between the French and the US.207

3.3.	Legal framework and oversight

3.3.1.	Legal framework

Electronic surveillance is regulated by the Code de la Sécurité Intérieure, a legislative
code established in 2012 and regrouping various laws and rules related to French internal
security.208 The specific rules on "security intercepts" (interceptions de sécurité) can be
found in Book 2, Title IV of this Code. They strictly regulate security intercepts authorised
by the Prime Minister on the advice of the National Advisory Commission on security
intercepts (CNCIS), an independent administrative authority reviewing surveillance
requests. The Code de la Sécurité Intérieure abrogated a 1991 law on secrecy of
correspondence209 which had, until 2012, regulated the conditions for wiretaps (which
required permission of an investigative judge). The new Code was strongly criticised by
the CNCIS in its activity report210 for including security intercepts in a broader and

d'écoute des signaux radar. Environ 80 % du budget annuel d'investissement de la direction technique
de la DGSE financent des projets intéressant également d'autres organismes. »)

203	Source: Statement by Jacques Follorou at the European Parliament's LIBE Committee Inquiry on
Inquiry on Electronic Mass Surveillance of EU Citizens, 1st Hearing, 5 September 2013.

204	Source: Assemblée Nationale (2013), Compte-rendu no. 56, op. cit.

205	Ibid. The original statement was « Ainsi à l'initiative des Américains, les services occidentaux ont mis
en place une base de données permettant à chacun de disposer immédiatement de l'ensemble des
informations recueillies »

206	Source: D. Priest (2013), 'Help From France Key In Covert Operations', Washington Post, 3 July 2005.

207	Source: D. Servenay (2010), 'Terrorisme: pourquoi Alliance Base a fermé à Paris', Rue89, 24 May

2010, available at:	http://www.rue89.com/2010/05/24/terrorisme-fermeture-dalliance-base-a-paris-

152349

208	Available (in French) at: http://bit.lv/1dimLYp

209	Loi no 91-646 du 10 juillet 1991 relative au secret des correspondances émises par la voie des
communications électroniques.

210	See Commission nationale de contrôle des interceptions de sécurité (2012), 20e rapport d'activité
2011-2012, Paris.

65

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

vaguer package of rules along with, for instance, "security in public transportation" or
"security guards in buildings". The report underlined the fact that any exception to the
right to secrecy of correspondence should be provided for in a specific law and not in a
code.211

In addition, a new Anti-Terror Act enacted on 23 January 2006212 granted increased
powers to the police and intelligence services, allowing them to get telecom data directly
from ISPs and extended telecom data retention possibilities.

The law strictly regulates security intercepts authorised by the Prime Minister on the
advice of the National Advisory Commission on security intercepts (CNCIS). However,
there is a gap in the legal framework regarding the large-scale interception and storage
of data, leaving a degree of legal uncertainty which intelligence services appear to have
exploited. Hence a senior member of the intelligence services interviewed by Le Monde
journalists is reported to have claimed that collection of meta-data by DGSE is not illegal
but 'alegal' - conducted 'outside the law'.213 This was however contrasted by the CNIL,
the independent body which stated that:

Le régime juridique des interceptions de sécurité interdit la mise en œuvre par les
services de renseignement, d'une procédure telle que Prism. Chaque demande de
réquisition de données ou d'interception est ciblée et ne peut pas être réalisée de
manière massive, aussi quantitativement que temporellement. De telles pratiques ne
seraient donc pas fondées légalement.214

3.3.2.	Oversight

Parliamentary oversight over communications surveillance in France is deemed to be
relatively weak.215 First, because all requests for classified documents from parliamentary
committees to intelligence services are rejected since all data transmitted by a foreign
service remain property of the service to which the data have been directed. A senator or
representative has no right to hear or question a member of a defined intelligence
service. The directors of intelligence agencies can only be subjected to official

hearings.216

The main body responsible for the oversight of interception surveillance in France is the
CNCIS (Commission nationale pour les interceptions de securité).217 The CNCIS is
mandated to exert an a priori control on security interceptions (wiretapping) and to
assess whether the purpose of the interception meets principles of proportionality etc.
However, its reach is judged to be substantially constrained by its limited personnel (only
five members),218 budget and administrative capacity.219 Moreover it is doubtful that it

211	Ibid., p. 38: "S'agissant de dispositions portant sur la protection des libertés publiques, il résulte des
travaux parlementaires ayant conduit à l'adoption, tant de la loi n° 91-646 du 10 juillet 1991 que de la
loi n° 2006-64 du 23 janvier 2006 relative à la lutte contre le terrorisme, que la consecration législative
du secret des correspondances électroniques privées, ainsi que les exceptions à ce principe, doivent être
prévues par une loi spéciale, comme pour toute liberté publique. Or ces dispositions se retrouvent
désormais fondues dans un vaste ensemble normatif couvrant des domaines multiples et variés."

212	Loi No. 2006-64 du 23 janvier 2006 relative à la lutte contre le terrorisme et portant dispositions
diverses relatives à la sécurité et aux contrôles frontaliers.

213	Source: J. Follorou and F. Johannes (2013), 'Révélations sur le Big Brother français,' Le Monde, 4 July
2013; See also testimony of Jacques Follorou, EP Hearing 5 September 2013.

214	Source: J. Follorou and F. Johannes (2013), 'Révélations sur le Big Brother français,' Le Monde, 4 July
2013.

215	A. Wills et al. (2011), Parliamentary oversight of security and intelligence agencies in the European
Union, Study for LIBE Committee of the European Parliament.

216	Source: input of anonymous expert.

217	CNCIS was established by the law of 10 July 1991 on secrecy of correspondence via electronic
communication.

218	Composed of both Parlementarians and judges.

219	A. Wills et al. (2011), Parliamentary oversight of security and intelligence agencies in the European
Union, Study for LIBE Committee of the European Parliament; Statement by Jacques Follorou at the

66

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

has been routinely consulted (if at all) during the DGSE's metadata collection
activities.220

It is relevant here to note that two French human rights NGOs are attempting to launch
an official judicial investigation into the surveillance scandals in France. The Paris
prosecutor's office has opened a preliminary inquiry following the submission of a joint
complaint by the NGOs Fédération internationale des droits de l'homme (FIDH) and Ligue
des droits de l'homme (LDH) on 11 July 2013.221 Both NGOs claim that infringements of
personal liberties have taken place through automated data processing. On the basis of
the French Criminal Code, they challenge the fraudulent access to an automated data
processing system, collection of personal data by fraudulent means, wilful violation of the
intimacy of the private life and the use and conservation of recordings and documents
obtained through such means.

European Parliament's LIBE Committee Inquiry on Inquiry on Electronic Mass Surveillance of EU Citizens,
1st Hearing, 5 September 2013; CNCIS (2012), CNCIS: 20e rapport d'activité 2011 - 2012, available at:
http://www.ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/var/storage/rapports-publics/134000156/0000.pdf.

220	Source: input of anonymous expert.

221	See C. Labbe and N. Vinocur (2013), "French prosecutor investigates U.S. Prism spying scheme",
Reuters, 28 August 2013, available at: www.reuters.com/article/2013/08/28/us-usa-security-france-
idUSBRE97R0WE20130828. See also the official complaint on the website of the FIDH:
www.fidh.org/en/europe/France.568/fidh-and-ldh-file-a-complaint-for-infringement-of-personal-data-
13648

67

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

4.	Germany222

Evidence gathered on the surveillance activities of the German intelligence services also
indicate that Germany has been engaging in large-scale surveillance of communications
data, and that these activities are linked to a network of exchange and transfer of data
with both domestic intelligence and law enforcement agencies as well as with
international partners, despite the existence of a strong constitutional and legal
framework for the protection of privacy.

4.1.	Programme(s) for large-scale surveillance

At the centre of the allegations concerning German large-scale surveillance activities is
the Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND) or Federal Intelligence Service which is
responsible for conducting foreign intelligence analysis and electronic surveillance of
'threats to German interests' from abroad. It employs approximately 6,500 persons and
had a budget of 504.8 Million EUR for the year 20 1 2.223 However, also implicated are the
Militärischen Abschirmdienst (MAD) the Military Counterintelligence Service224 and
the Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz (BfV) the Federal Office for the Protection of
the Constitution which is tasked with "intelligence-gathering on threats concerning the
democratic order, the existence and security of the federation or one of its states, and
the peaceful coexistence of peoples; with counter-intelligence; and with protective
security and counter-sabotage". The latter is under the responsibility of the Ministry of
Interior and specific regional offices exist in all 16 Länder. The BfV employed 2,757
persons and had a budget of 210 Million EUR in 2012.225

According to the information available to the public, the BND operates a service capable
of directly connecting to digital traffic nodes through which most of the foreign
communications flow.226 This is legally authorised by the G-10 Law (see below) which
allows the three intelligence agencies mentioned above (the BND, the MAD and the BfV)
to search up to 20% of communications having a foreign element according to certain
keywords for specific purposes such as the fight against terrorism or the protection of the
Constitution.227

In terms of data flows, the biggest node in Germany - and, according to certain figures,
in the world - is the DE-CIX (German Commercial Internet Exchange) in Frankfurt.228
According to the Spiegel newspaper, the BND has set up special offices at this location to
divert incoming traffic, copy the data and analyse it later in the BND headquarters in

222	Data presented in this section has been gathered primarily on the basis of press reports and official
documentation (e.g. Parliamentary questions, reference to official legal texts and case law).

223 The number of employees for the BND	is mentioned on the BND's website:
www.bnd.bund.de/DE/Karriere/Allgemeine%20Informationen/Allgemeine%20Informationen node.html,
the budget of the BND can be found in the Official federal budget for 2012, Section 04, available at
www.bundesfinanzministerium.de/bundeshaushalt2012/pdf/epl04.pdf. p.21.

224	German Ministry of Interior (2013) Verfassungsschutzbericht 2012, BMI 13006, p. 13, available at
http://www.verfassungsschutz.de/embed/vsbericht-2012.pdf

225	Ibidem.

226	Source: P. Beuth (2013) 'Wie der BND das Netz überwacht', Zeit Online, 18 June 2013, available at
www.zeit.de/digital/datenschutz/2013-06/internet-ueberwachung-bnd

227 The G-10 Law, in its § 10(4), states "In den Fällen der §§ 5 und 8 sind die Suchbegriffe in der
Anordnung zu benennen. Ferner sind das Gebiet, über das Informationen gesammelt werden sollen, und
die Übertragungswege, die der Beschränkung unterliegen, zu bezeichnen. Weiterhin ist festzulegen,
welcher Anteil der auf diesen Übertragungswegen zur Verfügung stehenden Übertragungskapazität
überwacht werden darf. In den Fällen des § 5 darf dieser Anteil höchstens 20 vom Hundert betragen."
(www.gesetze-im-internet.de/g10 2001/BJNR125410001.html)

228	Weller, D., Woodcock, B. (2013) 'Internet Traffic Exchange: Market Developments and Policy
Challenges'. OECD Digital Economy Papers, 207, p. 41.

68

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Pullach, Bavaria.229 This was confirmed by a reply to a parliamentary question by the
government,230 as well as by Germany's Justice Minister Sabine Leutheusser-
Schnarrenberger and by the head of the G-10 Committee Hans De With.231 The gathered
data is then analysed through the use of keywords and selectors on terrorism.232 233

According to the Spiegel,

Via this hub, the largest in Europe, e-mails, phone calls, Skype conversations and text
messages flow from regions that interest the BND like Russia and Eastern Europe,
along with crisis areas like Somalia, countries in the Middle East, and states like
Pakistan and Afghanistan.233 (Emphasis added)

The same article mentions that the head of the BND, Gerhard Schindler, recently
requested an increase in the BND's budget of 100 Million euros for the next five years in
order to hire new agents and improve the technological surveillance capabilities. This
modernisation project has been given the name of "Technikaufwuchsprogramm" (which
can be translated into "Technological Coming-of-age Programme").234 Several sources of
information hint at a possible German system collecting data through private companies,
similar to the US PRISM programme. Private companies such as Internet service
providers allegedly copy the data requested by the BND on its special servers. The
hardware and software architecture used in that case could be the so-called "SINA-Box"
which is a means of transferring sensitive data in unsecure environments.235

It is also worth mentioning that the Federal Police has set up a computerised architecture
called 'INPOL-neu' which contains millions of data extracted from police and judicial
investigations and from the SIS database. Intelligence services have complete access to
the INPOL database, which is also linked to the Europol Information System (EIS).

As seen in the French case, there is considerable pooling of resources/data exchange
between the various German intelligence and law enforcement bodies. Since 2001 the
three intelligence services have been authorised to extend their domain of investigation
in terms of information collection, analysis and dissemination and may exchange
information between themselves as well as with police agencies, something which was
once regulated and restricted by federal laws.

In particular, the MAD has been allowed to collect information on the national borders
and exchange information with the two other intelligence services, which has broken the
long established German tradition of complete separation between a military intelligence
service and its civilian counterparts.

Concerning police-intelligence cooperation, it is interesting to note that the BfV has
implemented a common database on Islamic terrorism with the Federal Criminal Police
Office (Bundeskriminalamt, BKA), a first tool bridging the historical gap between
federal police and secret service. A recent bill also extended the powers of the BKA to
secretly gather data on private computers through the use of highly specialised software

229	Source: Spiegel Online (2013) '100-Millionen-Programm: BND will Internet-Überwachung massiv
ausweiten', 16 June 2013, available at www.spiegel.de/politik/deutschland/internet-ueberwachung-bnd-
will-100-millionen-investieren-a-905938.html

230	German Parliament (2012) Antwort der Bundesregierung auf die Kleine Anfrage der Abgeordneten
Andrej Hunko, Jan Korte, Jan van Aken, weiterer Abgeordneter und der Fraktion DIE LINKE -
„Strategische Fernmeldeaufklärung" durch Geheimdienste des Bundes, Drucksache 17/9640, available at
http://dip21.bundestag.de/dip21/btd/17/096/1709640.pdf

231	See M. Ermert (2013), "PRISM scandal: internet exchange points as targets for surveillance", H-
Online, 2 July 2013, available at www.h-online.com/security/news/item/PRISM-scandal-internet-
exchange-points-as-targets-for-surveillance-1909989.html

232	Source: Spiegel Online (2013) 'The German Prism: Berlin Wants to Spy Too', 17 June 2013, available
at www.spiegel.de/international/germanv/berlin-profits-from-us-spving-program-and-is-planning-its-
own-a-906129-2.html

233	Ibid.

234

Ibid.

235	Source: P. Beuth (2013) 'Wie der BND das Netz überwacht', op. cit.

69

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

(so called "Bundestrojaner" or Federal Trojan Horses) for the purposes of criminal
investigations.236 It is also worth noting the existence of integrated police services that
have been set up at federal level to boost data exchange and analysis at all levels, such
as the GTAZ (Gemeinsames Terrorismusabwehrzentrum). The GTAZ, located in
Berlin, is aiming at strengthening national cooperation between Länder and State, ie
between regional and federal police forces, the military, the customs, intelligence
services, financial services, and at fostering international cooperation against Islamic
terrorism.

4.2.	Cooperation with foreign intelligence services

Reports publishing the Snowden revelations concenring German surveillance programmes
such as the Spiegel, also highlighted evidence regarding cooperation between the
German intelligence services and their US counterparts.

Allegedly, millions of metadata collected by the BND were transferred to the NSA via data
collection sites on German territory:

The Snowden documents mention two data collection sites known as signals
intelligence activity designators (SIGADs), through which the controversial US
intelligence agency gathered about 500 million pieces of metadata in December 2012
alone. The code names cited in the documents are "US-987LA" and "US-987LB." The
BND now believes that the first code name stands for Bad Aibling. Day after day and
month after month, the BND passes on to the NSA massive amounts of connection
data relating to the communications it had placed under surveillance. The so-called
metadata -- telephone numbers, email addresses, IP connections -- then flow into the
Americans' giant databases.237

The same article underlines the fact that copies of two pieces of software developed by
the German BND have also been given to NSA agents: "Mira4" and "Veras".238 These two
programmes are allegedly similar in nature to the US XKeyscore system, but there is a
clear lack of information on the functions and scope of such software. According to the
Spiegel information, the NSA and the BND jointly presented the XKeyscore programme to
the civilian Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz in 2011. Also, according to disclosures by
the Washington Post, Germany participates in meetings in the framework of the secret
intelligence "Alliance Base" in France, mentioned above, along with US, UK, French,
Canadian and Australian representatives which routinely exchange information.239

Many articles mention the long history of data exchanges between Germany and its
Western allies, mostly during the Cold War in the 1960s but also after the 9/11
attacks.240 Bilateral data transfer agreements with the former powers that occupied West
Germany - United States, UK and France - have recently been cancelled following the
PRISM scandal. These agreements included a task foreseen for the German intelligence
agencies to spy on post and radio communications for the purpose of protecting Western
troops stationed in Germany.241

236	See Federal Office of Crime Prevention Act (Gesetz über das Bundeskriminalamt und die
Zusammenarbeit des Bundes und der Länder in kriminalpolizeilichen Angelegenheiten, BKA-Gesetz),
available at www.gesetze-im-internet.de/bkag 1997/

237	Source: H. Gude, L. Poitras and M. Rosenbach (2013) 'Mass Data: Transfers from Germany Aid US
Surveillance', Spiegel Online, 5 August 2013, available at www.spiegel.de/international/world/german-
intelligence-sends-massive-amounts-of-data-to-the-nsa-a-914821.html

238	Ibidem.

239Source: D. Priest (2013), 'Help From France Key In Covert Operations', op. cit.

240	Source: M. Eddy (2013) 'For Western Allies, a Long History of Swapping Intelligence', The New York
Times, 9 July 2013, available at www.nvtimes.com/2013/07/10/world/europe/for-western-allies-a-long-
historv-of-swapping-intelligence.html

241	Der Standard (2013) 'Deutschland beendet Geheimdienst-Abmachung mit Frankreich', 6 August 2013,
available at http://derstandard.at/1375625808305/Deutschland-beendet-Geheimdienst-Abmachung-mit-
Frankreich

70

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

4.3.	Legal framework and oversight

4.3.1.	Legal framework

Article 10 of the German Constitution on the privacy of correspondence, posts and
telecommunications states that

1)	The privacy of correspondence, posts and telecommunications shall be inviolable.

2)	Restrictions may be ordered only pursuant to a law. If the restriction serves to
protect the free democratic basic order or the existence or security of the Federation
or of a Land, the law may provide that the person affected shall not be informed of the
restriction and that recourse to the courts shall be replaced by a review of the case by
agencies and auxiliary agencies appointed by the legislature.242

The main federal law in Germany regulating communications surveillance is the G-10
Law, which allows for certain limitations to the secrecy of communications as provided in
the Article 10 of the Constitution.243 Under the G-10 Law, intelligence services may
operate warrantless automated wiretaps of domestic and international communications
for specific purposes such as the fight against terrorism or the protection of the
Constitution. The G-10 Law was amended in 1994 and 2001 to add electronic and voice
communications to the list of communications that intelligence agencies may monitor.
Also, the law in its paragraph 10 allows the BND to search up to 20% of foreign
communications according to certain keywords - these communications include
telephone conversations, e-mails, chats etc.

Two major decisions of the German Federal Constitutional Court have limited the scope
of the G-10 Law in recent years:

•	In March 2004, the Court ruled that the G-10 Law infringed the German
Constitution, especially its Article 1 on human dignity and Article 13 on the
inviolability of private homes.244 The court held that certain communications, such
as contacts with close family members, doctors, priests or lawyers, are protected
by an absolute area of intimacy that no government may infringe.

•	In February 2008, in a landmark decision, the Court declared certain provisions of
a regional law unconstitutional.245 The regional law (of North-Rhine Westphalia)
allowed the regional Office for the Protection of the Constitution to secretly gather
data on private computers. The Court interpreted Articles 1 and 2 of the German
Constitution as containing a fundamental right for every citizen to have the
integrity and confidentiality of IT systems guaranteed by the state. The possibility
of secret online searches on computers is not categorically ruled out - the Court
specified that such measures can only be justified under strict conditions and
when there is an imminent threat to the life, physical integrity or liberty of
persons, or to the foundations of the state or the existence of mankind.

4.3.2.	Oversight

Two oversight bodies exist at Parliamentary level for controlling the activities of German
intelligence services:

242 See the translated version of the German Grundgesetz here: http://www.aesetze-im-
internet.de/enalisch aa/enalisch aa.html

243 The full text of the G-10 Law is available online (in German): http://www.aesetze-im-
internet.de/a10 2001/BJNR125410001.html

244	Federal Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassunasaericht) decision of 3 March 2004, reference number:
1 BvR 2378/98, available at http://www.bverfa.de/entscheidunaen/rs20040303 1bvr237898.html (in
German).

245	Federal Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassunasaericht) decision of 27 February 2008, reference

number:	1	BvR	370/07,	available	at

www.bundesverfassunasaericht.de/entscheidunaen/rs20080227 1bvr037007.html (in German);

71

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

•	The G-10 Committee is a committee of the German Parliament (Bundestag) which
has the task to decide on the necessity and legitimacy of the measures taken by
the three intelligence agencies mentioned above which could infringe upon the
fundamental rights enshrined in Article 10 of the German Constitution.246 It is
composed of 4 Members of the German Parliament. The G-10 Committee is
triggered when an intelligence service makes an official request for a surveillance
measure to the German Ministry of Interior and this request is granted. The G-10
also follows the whole procedure, including the collection of the personal data, its
analysis and its use. The G-10 also checks whether fundamental rights of German
citizens have been violated following individual complaints. Compared with
oversight authorities in the USA and in other member states examined in this
briefing paper, the German G-10 is the only oversight body that does not only
authorise surveillance requests, but also checks how the collection, storage, and
analysis of personal data is carried out, investigate individual complaints and
holds responsibility for the implementation of the surveillance programmes.247

•	The PKGr - Parliamentary Control Committee is the oversight body responsible for
controlling the three federal intelligence services mentioned above.248 The German
government is obliged to inform the PKGr and to provide all relevant information
on the activities of the intelligence agencies to its members. The PKGr is
composed of 11 Members of Parliament. According to a recent report by the PKGr
on the 2011 activities of the BND, more than 2,9 million of e-mails and text
messages have been the subject of surveillance measures.249

In parallel to these two oversight authorities, several other official bodies may have an
influence on the ways in which the intelligence services operate in Germany:

•	The Committee on Budget of the Bundestag (Haushaltsausschuss),250

•	The Courts at national and regional levels,

•	The Federal Court of Auditors (Bundesrechnungshof),251

•	And the Data Protection Authority (Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and
Freedom of Information).252

German data protection bodies at the federal and the regional levels have, in a joint
statement, called for increasing the control powers of the two German oversight bodies
and strengthening the links with data protection authorities.253

246	http://www.bundestaa.de/bundestaa/aremien/a10/index.html

247	Refer to S. Heumann, B. Scott (2013), "Law and Policy in Internet Surveillance Programs: United
States, Great Britain and Germany", Stiftung Neue Verantwortung / Open Technology Institute
publication, September 2013.

248	http://www.bundestaa.de/bundestaa/arem¡en/pkar/¡ndex.isp

249	German Parliament (2013) Unterrichtung durch das Parlamentarische Kontrollgremium (PKGr) -

Bericht gemäß § 14 Absatz 1 Satz 2 des Gesetzes zur Beschränkung des Brief-, Post- und
Fernmeldegeheimnisses (Artikel 10-Gesetz - G 10) über die Durchführung sowie Art und Umfang der
Maßnahmen nach den §§ 3, 5, 7a und 8 dieses Gesetzes - (Berichtszeitraum 1. Januar bis 31. Dezember
2011),	Drucksache	17/12773,	14	March	2013,	available	at:

http://dip21.bundestag.de/dip21/btd/17/127/1712773.pdf (in German).

250	See http://www.bundestag.de/bundestag/ausschuesse17/a08/index.isp

251	http://www.bundesrechnungshof.de/en7set language=en

252	http://www.bfdi.bund.de/EN/Home/homepage node.html

253	See the joint statement at http://bit.lv/17vD7nn (last accessed 22 October 2013)

72

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

5.	The Netherlands254

There are currently no publicly disclosed programmes of mass cyber surveillance in the
Netherlands. Current discussions around large-scale surveillance are limited to expert
arenas and are linked to the mandate and capabilities of a new Sigint and Cyber agency,
the Joint Sigint Cyber Unit (JSCU) to be established in 2014.

5.1.	(Potential) programmes for large-scale surveillance

The Joint Sigint Cyber Unit (JSCU), codenamed "Project Symbolon", will start to function
in 20 1 4255. The unit was announced as part of the Dutch Ministry of Defense's Cyber
Strategy in 20 1 2256 as a joint effort of the AIVD (General Intelligence and Security
Service) and MIVD (Military Intelligence and Security Service). It will replace the current
National Signals Intelligence Organisation (NSO), also created with staff from AIVD and
MIVD in 2003.

The JSCU is expected to centralise all Signals and Cyber surveillance in the
Netherlands257 and will have a staff of 3 5 0.258 Its headquarters should be located in the
offices of the AIVD in Zoetermeer, while other departments will be located in MIVD
premises in The Hague. The signals location in Burum and the analysis location in
Eibergen, currently operated by the NSO, will stay active.259

There is currently little knowledge about the budget that will be dedicated to the JSCU.
Project Argo II (establishment of the agency) has a budget of € 17 million260.

Concerning the objectives of the new agency, traditionally, Dutch SIGINT activities have
focused on supporting military missions abroad and increasingly on counterterrorism
activities,261 but their official mandate also includes non-security related tasks, such as
the collection of economic intelligence. The official objectives of the new agency are both
defensive and offensive cyber activity. Offensive activities are being justified by recent
cyber-attacks, such as the compromising of the security of government services by the
hijacking of electronic signatures issued by certificate authority DigiNotar.262

254	The data presented here was gathered on the basis of news articles, checked and complemented by
interviews with the following experts: Ot van Daalen, Bits of Freedom, 9/10/2013; Jelle van Buuren,
Leiden University, Center for Terrorism and Counter-terrorism 10/10/2013; Axel Arnbak, cybersecurity
and information law researcher at the Institute for Information Law, University of Amsterdam,
14/10/2013.

255	The renovation operation was codenamed "Argo II". A description of the project can be found on the
Dutch Rijks ICT-Dashboard website http://bit.lv/18Pqw32 Accessed 9/10/2013

256	Netherlands Ministry of Defense, The Defense Cyber Strategy, The Hague, September 2012. Available
at : http://bit. ly/GIGC4O Accessed 9/10/2013

257	Letter of the Dutch Ministry of Interior to Dutch MP Van Raak, 21/06/2013, available on the website
of the NGO Bits of Freedom http://bit.ly/18PpGn3 Accessed 9/10/2013

258	NRC Handelsblad, 24/09/2013. Translation in English available at : http://bit.ly/1hwMyK2 Accessed
9/10/2013

259	NRC Handelsblad, 24/09/2013 Translation in English available at : http://bit.ly/1hwMyK2 Accessed
9/10/2013

260	Dutch Rijks ICT-Dashboard website http://bit.ly/18Pqw32 Accessed 9/10/2013

261	The need for autonomous Dutch SIGINT was made particularly pressing after the debacle of the
'Dutchbat' (Dutch Battalion under the command of the United Nations Protection Force) in Srebrenica
during the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina, which was largely based on misleading intelligence. Source:
Interview with Axel Arnbak.

262	NRC Handelsblad, 24/09/2013. Translation in English available at : http://bit.ly/1hwMyK2 Accessed
9/10/2013

73

National programmes for mass surveillance of personal data in EU MS and their compatibility with EU law

The official objectives of the program, as reported in the 2012 Cyber Strategy prepared
by the Ministry of Defence263, are the following:

• Infiltration of computers and networks to acquire data: mapping out relevant
sections of cyberspace; monitoring vital networks; gaining a profound
understanding of the functioning of and technology behind offensive cyber assets.

•	The gathered information will be used for: early-warning intelligence products;
the composition of a cyber threat picture; enhancing the intelligence; production
in general; conducting counterintelligence activities.

•	Cyber intelligence capabilities cannot be regarded in isolation from intelligence
capabilities such as: signals intelligence (SIGINT); human intelligence (HUMINT)
and the MIVD's existing counterintelligence capability.

At the moment, SIGINT activities in the Netherlands are limited to targeting specific
individuals, both citizens and non-citizens, domestically and abroad. The MIVD is
responsible for overseas SIGINT, while the AIVD is responsible for domestic targeted
searches.

As mentioned previously, Dutch intelligence agencies are prohibited from conducting
mass cable surveillance. Telecommunication interceptions are focused on individuals, and
have to receive ministerial approval. In the meantime, both the AIVD and the MIVD
working within the NSO are allowed to collect and store internet communications. This
data can be searched through queries and keywords, but these also need to receive prior
ministerial approval. It is worth noting however the potential for large-scale surveillance
that the Netherlands holds given that the Amsterdam Internet Exchange Point (IXP) is
the second largest in Europe after Frankfurt.264 As noted above, the Amsterdam IXP has
partnered with other contractors in the development of Project Argos II.

The information currently gathered by the NSO and in the future by the JSCU will be
available to both AIVD and the MIVD. It is not known yet which other law enforcement
agencies will have access to the information produced by the JSCU. Concerning the
involvement of private actors, it is worth noting that private sector companies have been
involved in project Argo II: the Amsterdam Internet Exchange (AMS-IX), NICE Systems,
an Israeli firm specialising in cyber security, as well as Accenture, an American consulting
firm.265

5.2.	Cooperation with foreign intelligence services

Anonymous sources from the Dutch intelligence agencies have told the Telegraaf
newspaper that the AIVD has routine access to information from the NSA "within five
minutes".266 This would allegedly allow Dutch intelligence services to have access to
information on Dutch individuals from the US PRISM programme without the need for an
express warrant as required by Dutch law. The Dutch Parliament has launched an inquiry
into the role of the AIVD in this context to assess whether they have used private data
obtained through the NSA's activities.267 Dutch officials such as Home Affairs Minister

263	Netherlands Ministry of Defense, The Defense Cyber Strategy, The Hague, September 2012. Available
at: http://bit.lv/GIGC4O Accessed 9/10/2013

264	Weller, D., Woodcock, B. (2013) 'Internet Traffic Exchange: Market Developments and Policy
Challenges'. OECD Digital Economy Papers, 207, p. 41.

265	Letter of the Dutch Ministry of Interior to Dutch MP Van Raak. 21/06/2013 Available on the website of
the NGO Bits of Freedom http://bit.ly/18PpGn3 Accessed 9/10/2013

266	Source: B. Olmer (2013), 'Ook AIVD bespiedt internetter', De Telegraaf, 11 June 2013, available at:
www.telegraaf.nl/binnenland/21638965/ Ook AIVD bespiedt online .html See also the official
condemnation by the Dutch digital rights organization Bits of Freedom « Persbericht: Bits Of Freedom
Eist Einde Gebruik Prism Door Nederlandse Geheime Diensten » http://bit.ly/HeBh6l Accessed
10/10/2013.

267	Source: Amsterdam Herald (2013), 'Inquiry into role of Dutch intelligence agencies in Prism data
harvesting scandal', The Amsterdam Herald, 3 July 2013, available at:

74

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Ronald Plasterk have denied that AIVD and MIVD make direct use of the PRISM
programme.268 The Dutch government also released an official statement rebuffing the
allegation.269

5.3.	Legal framework and oversight

5.3.1.	Legal framework

The current legislative framework the Dutch Intelligence and Security Act 2002 (Wiv
2002) does not permit the services to wiretap "cable-bound communications" under any
circumstances.270 The establishment of the JSCU will therefore require a modification of
the law. A commission, headed by C.W.M. Dessens, has been established to investigate if
and under which conditions should the law be modified.271 The conclusions of the
commission, initially expected in September 2013, are likely to be made public before the
end of 20 1 3.272 On the basis of the composition of the commission, two of our
respondents suggested that it is likely that the law will be amended to permit the tapping
of cable-bound communications.

5.3.2.	Oversight

Currently, wiretapping activities require the approval of the minister of interior, who
signs off all wiretapping orders. The main institution in charge of the monitoring of the
AIVD and MIVD activities is the CTIVD (Review Committee on the Intelligence and
Security Services). The CTIVD does not have direct access to all activities of the services,
but is allowed to "sample" some of their activities for compliance. A recent report showed
that when the committee looked into the compliance in the context of international
SIGINT assistance, "it found that such assessments were not always made properly".273

There is currently no information about the structure of checks and balances that will
apply to the new JSCU, although it is likely that it will fall under CTIVD mandate.

http://amsterdamherald.com/index.php/rss/906-20130703-inauirv-role-dutch-intelligence-agencies-

prism-data-harvesting-scandal-united-states-nsa-europe-aivd-mivd-netherlands-dutch-securitv

268	See A. Eigenraam (2013), 'Plasterk: Nederland maakt geen gebruik van Prism', 21 June 2013, NRC
Handlesblad, available at: www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2013/06/21/plasterk-nederland-maakt-geen-gebruik-van-
prism/

269	See www.riiksoverheid.nl/nieuws/2013/06/21/geen-onbelemmerde-toegang-tot-internet-en-telefoon-
voor-aivd-en-mivd.html

270	NRC Handelsblad, 24/09/2013 Translation in English available at: http://bit.ly/1hwMyK2 Accessed
9/10/2013

271 The commission is composed of : Luitenant-generaal b.d. M.A. Beuving; prof. dr. mr. E.R. Muller;
vice-admiraal b.d. W. Nagtegaal; mr. H.J.I.M. de Rooij; prof. mr. W.M.E. Thomassen; prof. dr. W.J.M.
Voermans. See "Regeling instelling Evaluatiecommissie Wiv 2002" http://bit.ly/18PuM2J Accessed
9/10/2013

272	NRC Handelsblad, 24/09/2013 Translation in English available at : http://bit.ly/1hwMyK2 Accessed
9/10/2013

273	See CTIVD, 'Toezichtsrapportage inzake de inzet van SIGINT door de MIVD', CTIVD nr. 28, 23 August
2011, pp. 59-60. Quoted in Hoboken, Arnbak, van Eijk (2013) Obscured by Clouds, or How to Address
Governmental Access to Cloud Data From Abroad. Paper presented at the Privacy Law Scholars
Conference 2013, 6-7 June, Berkeley, CA. http://bit.ly/18PxyVK Accessed 9/10/2013; See also the most
recent report of the CTIVD, "TOEZICHTSRAPPORT inzake de inzet van de afluisterbevoegdheid en de
bevoegdheid tot de selectie van Sigint door de AIVD", July 2013, http://bit.ly/H1KA8R Accessed
9/10/2013.

75

POLICY DEPARTMENT ^

CITIZENS' RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

Role

Policy departments are research units that provide specialised advice
to committees, inter-parliamentary delegations and other parliamentary bodies.

Policy Areas

Constitutional Affairs

Justice, Freedom and Security

Gender Equality

Legal and Parliamentary Affairs

Petitions

Documents

Visit the European Parliament website: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/studies

PHOTO CREDIT: ¡Stock International Inc.

CATALOGUE BA-01-13-601-EN-C