 US, German Increase Cooperation on African
Targets

mom.- (analnnaum
Analyst, Join 1vity[H52C11}

Run Date: 12!] 

  
 

The is a joint US-Ger'inan operation conducted from a
German SIGINT facility. It has been ?lling gaps for the US-rnn Enrogean

lof'j

Security Operations Center's counterterrorism effort, as well as other
African missions, for over a year now**. So far in EDDT, NSA has produced thirteen
Africa-related SIGINT reports f'roijA collection, a success which has opened the
door to greater cooperation at JSA on the African target set.

Mongfhi'i' in Bavaria, home to ISA.
ESDG and ISA: A Logical Match

Due to higher priority ongoing tasks for Iraq and Afghanistan, ESGG
[see background! has had dif?culty in getting collection resources to survey for
African signals. As a result, ESGG has been investigating possible Third Party
relationships to leverage partner accesses and linguistic capabilities. END is both a
trusted partner and a very modern and capable SIGINT service, which lessens
concerns about sharing capabilities and SIGINT selectors with this partner as
opposed to other potential African partners. JSA's collection resources, as well as
END's oyerlapping requirements regarding North Africa, made JSA an obvious
choice to quickly respond to ESGG's requirements.

JSA Collects Against Africa

In fall of EDGE, JSA began collecting email trafIic related to 
GSM infrastructure, producing a number of SIGDE?J-related reports. Then in the
summer ESGG requested that JSA perform a survey ofsin satellites in
search of specific North African communications. During the course ofthe suryey,
JSA located and initiated collection signals carrying 
communications. In October EDDT, ESGG issued its first GT SIGINT report from
JSA's GSM [Global System for Mobile communications} collection. In addition to

supporting ESGG, JSA is now collecting? signals in support of
NSAW's GT mission.

Overlapping Requirements

NSA and END have similar SIGINT requirements regarding Africa.
END has standing intelligence requirements for various political and humanitarian
issues throughout Africa. END's current priorities in Africa are Sudan, Algeria, and
Somalia. In Sudan, END is collecting two different GSM networks at another
FGENSAT facility, and using the metadata to track targets. Germany is very
interested in the peace process in Darfur and southern Sudan. Regarding Algeria,
END has been processing border guard communications f'roijA collection, but
these signals appear to he migrating to a new data network, requiring a new
processing capability. END HQs are eagerly awaiting a processing solution
in order to more fully exploit these internal Algerian communications. For Somalia,
Germany has forces in the Horn of Africa region supporting Operation Enduring
Freedom, and is very interested in the political and humanitarian issues
surrounding Somalia.

Future

NSA at JSA are working with GSRG [Collection Strategies and

Requirements Genterll-Europe and Representatiye AFEIGDM to explore
new areas where JSA can support oyerlapping African SIGINT requirements from

Eof'j

NSA and END.

Notes:

stands for "Joint SIGINT Actiyity." It is operated by NSA and
the Eundesnachrichtendienst - German Foreign Intelligence Service} at the

German SIGINT facility Mangfall Kaserne in anaria. Any association of NSA with
Mangfall Kaserne is TD USA, FUEY.

013116 

 

Sof'j

