SECRET

ISUAV Video Descrambling

Author:

vereîon^ra

Introduction

Analogue video from Israeli UAVs has been intercepted in both clear (i.e. unencrypted) and scrambled
(i.e. encrypted) formats. Processing clear video using M2Extra is relatively straightforward, the method
being described in Anarchist training Module 4. For scrambled video the capability exists to exploit the
content using a combination of image processing tools and scrypts on Mutiny Jaguar.

Background

Interception of scrambled analogue video signals at Anarchist has a long history, with the earliest
examples dating back to 1998.

The Signal

The appearance of the encrypted signal in the frequency domain is virtually indistinguishable from the
clear video signal. A comparison of the Post-D data for an example of clear video, and an encrypted
example from a few seconds later (figs 1a & 1b) show that, apart from a subtle modification to the
envelope, the signals appear very similar. The most noticable effect is an increase in energy at lower
frequencies, consistent with the detail in the image being smoothed out by the scrambling process.

Scrambled Imagery

As can be seen by examining an example of a frame of scrambled video (Fig.2) the video frame is
unchanged by the scrambling method. In addition to the image seen in clear video there is also two
lines of digital information encoded in the teletext area at the top of the screen. This is presumed to be
information relating to the scrambling, e.g. a cryptographic ‘key’ to enable the original image to be
reconstructed.

Investigation of the data has determined the method by which the video is scrambled. The method
used is a ‘cut & slide’ technique whereby each line is cut at a location and the two halves are
transmitted in the opposite order. This technique was originally used by Sky TV to protect their
analogue transmissions before they switched to digital, the system being known as VideoCrypt.

1 Of 3

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ	(non-sec) or email^^^^^^H

SECRET

SECRET

Fig. 2: An single frame of scrambled video imagery

Exploiting Scrambled Video Images

Having determined the technique used to scramble the video imagery a number of known attacks are
available from open source material. One technique in particular offers a brute force way of
reconstructing the image, without requiring any knowledge of the generating algorithm. This
technique, and the source code needed to employ it is freely available on the internet.

The computing power needed to descramble the images in near real time is considerable without the
use of dedicated hardware such as a video capture card that can record uncompressed images. It is
still possible to descramble individual frames to determine the image content without too much effort.

Method

The method involves capturing a video frame in bitmap (.BMP) format using M2Extra. The video data
should be processed as described in the M2Extra video processing guide. When the quality of the
video image is good a snapshot can be made of the data in the Event Processing window. Pause the
processing and use the left mouse button to zoom in to the scrambled image to exclude the frame.

From the file menu in the top left hand corner of the Event Processing window select Snap . .. (CTRL-
S), and choose .BMP as the format.

Start Martes in a terminal window with the command martes, and launch the Image Magick tool from a
terminal window with the command magick_display

Directory: |/daui/midas/m2cxtra/vidco/»hin/*

beforc.bmp
coord'J OOO.i mp
coord 5000.tmp
coords--.txt

coords-ACQ02-ACQT2.txt

coords.tmp

output.ppm

parainsproc_,l bl

predS0057v_th.tmp

pred 5005 7v_ l h _ bi tsOO.l m p

pred5O057v_lh_bits03.imp

pred50057v_lh_videoüû.dala

pred50057v_th_videoQ0.hdr

pred S0Q57v_lh_video01 key

pred50057v_lh_video01.mpg



Fig. 3: Image Magick and the file browsing menu

2	of 3

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on

(non-sec) or emaill

SECRET

SECRET

Select the bitmap image from the file menu, right click on the image and select Save ... The image
format can be set by pressing the Format button at the bottom of the window. There are a huge
number of different formats to select from. The format required is PPM format (portable pixmap).

In a terminal window at a command line prompt type

antisky -be input.ppm output, ppm

This will now have descrambled the image using the program antisky. The descrambled image can be
viewed using the Image Magick tool and converted to a more convenient format if desired.

The initial results from running antisky with the default settings as above may not produce particularly
good results depending on the image being descrambled. This is because there may be part of the
non-scrambled frame of the image included in the descrambling which corrupts the results. To
improve the descrambling there are two more option which force the program to ignore the left and
right hand sides of the image. Using the -I and -r (for left and right) flags and experimenting with
different values may produce better results. The descrambled image first obtained with the default
settings is shown in Fig. 4, whilst the image obtained with the command

antisky -be -115 -r3 input.ppm output.ppm

is shown in Fig. 5 and is considerably clearer.

There is no quick way of discovering the optimum settings for Antisky other than stepping through the
parameter space of values and selecting the one that gives the best results.

Fig. 5: Running antisky with optimised
settings

Fig.4: Running antisky with the default
settings

« '

As can be seen from Figs 4 & 5, for a good quality signal and optimal settings near perfect image
construction can be achieved.

3	of 3

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on

(non-sec) or emaill

SECRET