 ?ue-Year Ant?versary fur EUELAG

FROM: 
SUSLAG 
Run Date: DIEDDE

 

EaeciaiI US Liaieca Activity Gennaay has spent a year in a "tin can." {It's better
than it ecaade -- it's the nickname Jfar their new facility!) 

 

laf?

In April, the Special US Liaison Activity Germany celebrated one
year in their purpose-built facility on the German Ministry of Defense facility
Mangfall Kaserne in Bad Aibling, Germany. SUSLAG {formerly known as Combined
Group Germany} was compelled to ?nd a new home by the closure of its previous
host, Ead Aibling Station.

(sasa? ?rst heips?{Chiefof

Engineering and MaintenancefKE-EtllI piant a tree in Jfront ofthe new SUSLAG

bniidin on Mangfaii Kaserne. Aiso artici atin are, Jfrom ieft to right,-
i Engineering}, an?ChiefofStation, Mangfaii


Thanks to the combined efforts of the Bad Aibling Transition Team, the
Technical Support Program Management Of?ce, Eundesnachrichtendienst (END,
the German intelligence service and our German partner}, the European Technical
Center ITD, NCEUR, and others too numerous to mention, the
building was completed in just months, from groundbreaking to move-in, all
during the depths of winter. END colleagues affectionately refer to the
new SUSLAG building as "Die Elechdose" or "the Tin Can," owing to its difference
in appearance from the other buildings on Mangfall Kaserne -- it has no windows, is
made of metal and is shelter-like in appearance}. SUSLAG went off NSANET at Ead
Aibling Station on Friday, 3 April EDIE, and reappeared on NSANET in the new
facility on the following Monday, thanks to an outstanding team of IT professionals
working through the weekend.

In addition to SUSLAG's long-standing role as liaison to the German
intelligence service, it is parent to two exciting joint ventures, the Joint
Analysis Center and the Joint SIGINT Activity The Joint Analysis
Center com rises i'lve NSA civilian anal who are inte ated into the

 

JSA, the JAC's younger sibling, was declared operational last year and
continues to build toward full operating capability, which is expected by the end of
EDGE. The JSA is the outcome of an agreement between the Director, NSA, and the
President of the END to launch a strategic cooperation initiative in the mutual
pursuit of intelligence related to counterterrorism, counterproliferation, and other
transnational targets.

With the establishment of a US-only communications center in the new
SUSLAG facility, it became possible to provide secure connectivity forJSA, piggy-
backing on SUSLAG's connection to ETC, at which point the JSA comms pass
through ETC's Third-Party guard device onto NSANET. This provided for
the ?rst time an electronic connection from NSA to JSA for tasking to flow in one
direction, and SIGINT in the other. JSA is primarily a SIGDEV asset from NSA's
point ofview, but is an essential component of END's collection architecture. JSA is

Eofd

unique as ajointly manned, jointly tasked DNI site.

Following DIENSA's dictum that making our foreign partners more capable
also makes NSA more capable, NSA personnel assigned to JSA are teaching their
END counterparts new tools and techniques in advanced signals and protocol
analysis and DNI exploitation. Eut this is far more than an academic exercise --
training is being conducted in the course of executing tasked mission, currently
one NSA and two END tasks. END senior leadership recently commended JSA for
their efforts, particularly the contribution that JSA's Afghan task has made
to one of END's highest priority task, Force Protection in Afghanistan. FCIENSAT
Mission Management has assigned primary responsibility to JSA for 1D beams
on seven satellites, and JSA is continually surveying these beams and feeding the
resulting metadata to NSA systems.

SUSLAG continues in its traditional role as SIGINT liaison to the
Federal Republic of Germany. This role has been greatly facilitated by SUSLAG's
new location on Mangfall Kaserne. NSA personnel interact daily with END
counterparts, coordinating policy, conducting technical exchanges, expanding the
range of'cooperation in SIGINT, and deepening the partnership in many ways. The
availability secure VTC facility on Mangfall Kaserne allows for a close
and continuing exchange with our partner based on an unprecedented series of
VTCs. Additionally, visiting NSA technical experts have immediate access to END
counterparts, providing for an unmatched exchange of expertise.

SUSLAG is now established on a solid foundation for years to come. In the
past year, DIENSA, SID's Deputy Director, and the Principal Director of Foreign
Affairs have visited to add emphasis to their charge to Chief, SUSLAG to broaden
and deepen the SIGINT relationship with the German partner, moving in new and
exciting directions. These efforts have already begun to bear fruit, and the future of
this productive partnership seems assured.

 

Notes:

ITD Information Technology Directorate

NCEUR Europe

IISEL Installations Logistics

GSM a type of digital cellular comms [Global System for Mobile
Communications}

This article is reprinted from May's Foreign Affairs Digest

Sofa

Llof?

