IN THE MATTER OF STATE SURVEILLANCE

ADVICE

INTRODUCTION

1.	We are asked to advise Tom Watson MP, Chair of the All Party Parliamentary Group
on Drones, on the lawfulness of five possible scenarios concerning state surveillance
in the United Kingdom.

2.	The five scenarios are:

a.	The Government Communications Headquarters (‘GCHQ’) have intercepted
bulk electronic data sent between two persons located in the UK, but
transmitted along fibre-optic cables which run between the UK and the United
States. The electronic data arise from internet, email and telephone use;

b.	GCHQ have retained that data and submitted it to analysis including ‘pattern
of life’ analysis. That analysis has been applied to identified terror/criminal
suspects and also to individuals who are not suspected of wrongdoing;

c.	GCHQ have permitted the National Security Agency (‘NSA’) of the US to
access and retain that data;

d.	The NSA share data with the CIA so that it is available for targeting drone
strikes;

e.	US forces operate from a UK base, under the NATO Status of Forces
Agreement 1951 (for example RAF Croughton). That UK base is used as a
communications hub to transfer data both to and from the US. Some of the
data obtained overseas and transferred to the US have been obtained in
contravention of international law. Some of the material transferred from the
US via the UK includes data, instructions and orders to facilitate drone strikes. 3

3. The five scenarios are necessarily to some degree based on assumed facts.
However, we have been referred to a number of news reports arising out of the

1

recent disclosures made by Edward Snowden, upon which the scenarios are based.1
We note that in contrast to the approach of the US Government, the UK Government
has refused to confirm or deny the existence of the programme outlined in the
scenarios. Furthermore, the Guardian newspaper has not published any documents
concerning the activities of GCHQ in connection with what is known as the
TEMPORA programme.2 3

4.	For the purposes of this Advice, we proceed on the basis that the five scenarios are
accurate. We have been provided with copies of two applications arising from the
Snowden disclosures: an application by Big Brother Watch and others to the
European Court of Human Rights (‘the ECtHR’) (App. No. 58170/13); and an
application by Privacy International to the Investigatory Powers Tribunal (‘IPT’). Both
of those applications proceed on the basis of matters contained in the Snowden
disclosures. Furthermore, the disclosures have provided the factual under-pinning for
inquiries by public bodies, including the European Parliament which has recently
published a Draft Report on surveillance programmes.3 If and when evidence
substantiating or altering matters emerges, it might be necessary to re-consider
relevant parts of this Advice.

5.	It will be apparent that scenarios (a) - (d), and to some extent (e), are essentially
sequential steps in an overall hypothetical scenario. In this Advice, we consider the
legality of each scenario in turn. However, it should also be recalled that if any of the
intermediate scenarios is unlawful, that will break the sequence and should prevent
the authorities from acting as they currently do. In other words, the authorities must
establish that every step in the chain is lawful if they are to be permitted to carry on
with these activities.

1

http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/20/us-uk-secret-deal-surveiHance-personal-data;
http://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq; http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-
security/documents-reveal-nsas-extensive-involvement-in-targeted-killing-
program/2013/10/16/29775278-3674-11e3-8a0e-4e2cf80831fc_story.html;
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/exclusive-raf-croughton-base-sent-secrets-from-
merkels-phone-straight-to-the-cia-8923401 .html

2

That stands in contrast to the position in the United States of America where documents
demonstrating the NSA’s intercept program have been published.

3	2013/2188 (INI) Draft Report on the US NSA surveillance programme, surveillance bodies in
various Member States and their impact on EU citizens’ fundamental rights and on transatlantic
cooperation in Justice and Home Affairs, 8 January 2014. See, for example, the summary of the facts
at para 2 on page 16.

2

6.	We also note at the outset that the issues which we address are related to, but have
a somewhat different focus from and are narrower than the issues pending before the
ECtHR and the IPT in the applications referred to at paragraph 4 above. Of course, if
there are any relevant developments in those proceedings, then we would need to
re-visit our Advice as appropriate.

7.	In summary, and for the reasons set out below:

a.	Under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (‘RIPA’), GCHQ is not
entitled to intercept mass ‘internal’ contents data: the contents of emails or
phone calls between two individuals located in the British Islands. GCHQ is
entitled to intercept bulk ‘external’ contents data: the contents of
communications between the British Islands and elsewhere. GCHQ is also
entitled to intercept bulk communications data (sometimes termed
‘metadata’). The interception of that bulk data, although lawful for the
purposes of RIPA, is a disproportionate interference with the Article 8 rights of
UK citizens.

b.	GCHQ is entitled to submit the mass data that they collect to pattern of life
analysis, under the statutory framework. We consider that the current
framework for the retention, use and destruction of communications data is
inadequate and likely to be unlawful. The RIPA framework concerning
external contents data is also probably unlawful;

c.	GCHQ is entitled to transfer bulk data to the NSA, under RIPA, where the
Secretary of State is satisfied that the mechanisms for storing and destroying
that data in the receiver country are suitable. A transfer of intercept data is a
fresh interference with the individual’s Article 8 rights. We consider that the
statutory framework provides insufficient protections to the individuals
concerned. The government could at least ameliorate that situation by
agreeing and publishing a Memorandum of Understanding or other bilateral
agreement on data transfer specifying how the data should be stored, when
they should be destroyed, and the purposes for which the data may be used
under UK law;

d.	If the UK government knows that it is transferring data that may be used for
drone strikes against non-combatants (for example in Yemen or Pakistan),
that transfer is probably unlawful. An individual involved in passing that
information is likely to be an accessory to murder. It is well arguable, on a
variety of different bases, that the government is obliged to take reasonable
steps to investigate that possibility. However, it may be that the current

3

legislative framework imposes no obligation on the UK government to
investigate or prevent its agents from becoming accessories to murder in this
manner. If that is the case, we consider that outcome to be contrary to the
principles of public policy and good governance;

e.	The UK government is entitled to press charges against US servicemen
operating from NATO bases on UK soil. If data that have been unlawfully
obtained or used (for the purposes of British law) are transferred via a UK
NATO base, the UK government may prosecute any US serviceman involved
in that transfer. It appears, in practical terms, that the UK government may
not always know what takes place on RAF bases controlled by NATO forces.
As a result, that power to prosecute may be theoretical.

(A)	MASS COLLECTION OF DATA

8.	The statutory framework for surveillance in the United Kingdom is provided for in the
Intelligence and Security Act 1994 and RIPA. RIPA is the crucial statute, for our
purposes. RIPA itself relies on two essential distinctions: first, it distinguishes
between ‘internal’ and ‘external’ communications; and second, it treats the
interception of ‘contents’ and ‘communications’ data differently. These two
distinctions are addressed in turn.

Internal and External Communications

9.	RIPA provides in relevant part:

“1. Unlawful interception

(1) It shall be an offence for a person intentionally and without lawful authority to
intercept, at any place in the United Kingdom, any communication in the course of its
transmission by means of-

(a)	a public postal service; or

(b)	a public telecommunication system.

2. Meaning and location of “interception” etc.

(1) In this Act-

“public telecommunications service” means any telecommunications service which is
offered or provided to, or to a substantial section of, the public in any one or more
parts of the United Kingdom;

“public telecommunication system” means any such parts of a telecommunication
system by means of which any public telecommunications service is provided as are
located in the United Kingdom;

4

“telecommunications service" means any service that consists in the provision of
access to, and of facilities for making use of, any telecommunication system (whether
or not one provided by the person providing the service); and
“telecommunication system" means any system (including the apparatus comprised
in it) which exists (whether wholly or partly in the United Kingdom or elsewhere) for
the purpose of facilitating the transmission of communications by any means
involving the use of electrical or electro-magnetic energy.

(2)	For the purposes of this Act, but subject to the following provisions of this section, a
person intercepts a communication in the course of its transmission by means of a
telecommunication system if, and only if, he-

(a)	so modifies or interferes with the system, or its operation,

(b)	so monitors transmissions made by means of the system, or

(c)	so monitors transmissions made by wireless telegraphy to or from apparatus
comprised in the system,

as to make some or all of the contents of the communication available, while being
transmitted, to a person other than the sender or intended recipient of the
communication.

(4)	For the purposes of this Act the interception of a communication takes place in the United
Kingdom if, and only if, the modification, interference or monitoring ... is effected by conduct
within the United Kingdom and the communication is either-

(a)	intercepted in the course of its transmission by means of a public postal service or
public telecommunication system; or

(b)	intercepted in the course of its transmission by means of a private
telecommunication system in a case in which the sender or intended recipient of the
communication is in the United Kingdom.

5. Interception with a warrant.

(1)	Subject to the following provisions of this Chapter, the Secretary of State may issue a
warrant authorising or requiring the person to whom it is addressed, by any such conduct as
may be described in the warrant, to secure any one or more of the following-

(a) the interception in the course of their transmission by means of a postal service or
telecommunication system of the communications described in the warrant;

(d)	the disclosure, in such manner as may be so described, of intercepted material
obtained by any interception authorised or required by the warrant, and of related
communications data.

(2)	The Secretary of State shall not issue an interception warrant unless he believes-

(a)	that the warrant is necessary on grounds falling within subsection (3); and

(b)	that the conduct authorised by the warrant is proportionate to what is sought to be
achieved by that conduct.

(3)	Subject to the following provisions of this section, a warrant is necessary on grounds
falling within this subsection if it is necessary-

(a)	in the interests of national security;

(b)	for the purpose of preventing or detecting serious crime;

(c)	for the purpose of safeguarding the economic well—being of the United Kingdom;
or

(d)	for the purpose, in circumstances appearing to the Secretary of State to be
equivalent to those in which he would issue a warrant by virtue of paragraph (b), of
giving effect to the provisions of any international mutual assistance agreement.

(4)	The matters to be taken into account in considering whether the requirements of
subsection (2) are satisfied in the case of any warrant shall include whether the information
which it is thought necessary to obtain under the warrant could reasonably be obtained by
other means.

8. Contents of warrants.

5

(1)	An interception warrant must name or describe either-

(a)	one person as the interception subject; or

(b)	a single set of premises as the premises in relation to which the
interception to which the warrant relates is to take place.

(2)	The provisions of an interception warrant describing communications the
interception of which is authorised or required by the warrant must comprise one or
more schedules setting out the addresses, numbers, apparatus or other factors, or
combination of factors, that are to be used for identifying the communications that
may be or are to be intercepted.

(3)	Any factor or combination of factors set out in accordance with subsection (2)
must be one that identifies communications which are likely to be or to include-

(a)	communications from, or intended for, the person named or described in
the warrant in accordance with subsection (1); or

(b)	communications originating on, or intended for transmission to, the
premises so named or described.

(4)	Subsections (1) and (2) shall not apply to an interception warrant if-

(a)	the description of communications to which the warrant relates confines the
conduct authorised or required by the warrant to conduct falling within subsection (5);
and

(b)	at the time of the issue of the warrant, a certificate applicable to the warrant has
been issued by the Secretary of State certifying-

(i)	the descriptions of intercepted material the examination of which he
considers necessary; and

(ii)	that he considers the examination of material of those descriptions
necessary as mentioned in section 5(3)(a), (b) or (c).

(5)	Conduct falls within this subsection if it consists in-

(a)	the interception of external communications in the course of their transmission
by means of a telecommunication system; and

(b)	any conduct authorised in relation to any such interception by section 5(6).

(6)	A certificate for the purposes of subsection (4) shall not be issued except under the hand
of the Secretary of State.

20. Interpretation of Chapter I.

In this Chapter-

external communication” means a communication sent or received outside the British
Islands..." (emphasis added)

10.	The distinction between ‘external’ and ‘internal’ communications is critical, for the
purposes of intercepting and reading the contents of communications.

11.	First, the mechanism by which interception of ‘internal’ and ‘external’ communications
may be authorised is different. Interception of internal communications is subject to
the relatively stringent control mechanism, set out in section 8 (1) - (3) of RIPA. In
particular, the warrant must identify a named person or premises.

12.	Interception of external communications is much less strictly controlled. A warrant
may be issued where the Secretary of State:

a.	Describes the intercepted material; and

b.	Considers that interception is necessary for the purpose of national security,
preventing or detecting serious crime or safeguarding economic wellbeing.

6

13.	Accordingly, a warrant to intercept the contents of internal communications cannot
sanction the collection and retention of bulk electronic data of the sort envisaged in
scenario (a). Such a warrant has to be precisely targeted to a particular person or
premises.

14.	The position is different in relation to ‘external’ warrants. Under section 8(4)(a) of
RIPA, a warrant to intercept external communications only has to specify the
‘communications to which the warrant relates’. For example, it might be simply that
the warrant relates to interception of communications containing certain keywords. Or
communications between a large number of named individuals. At the most extreme
end of the spectrum, it is conceivable that an external warrant might specify ‘all
communications entering and leaving the British Isles’, or all such communications
carried on a particular cable. It may be that such broad warrants are wanted in order
subsequently to carry out the keyword analysis described above.

15.	In short ‘external’ warrants allow for interception of bulk or mass data, ‘internal’
warrants do not.

16.	The boundary between internal and external communications is reasonably clear in
most cases. Where a UK citizen sends an email or makes a telephone call to an
overseas location, that is an ‘external communication’ (for the purposes of section
20). Assuming that the warrant was lawful in other respects (in particular, on human
rights grounds), the contents of those communications could be intercepted on the
section 8 (4)-(5) basis.

17.	However, scenario (a) concerns the situation whereby communications between two
individuals who are both based in the UK are nonetheless transmitted via a
transatlantic cable. We are instructed that that may frequently occur, for example
where the relevant internet server is based in the US.

18.	We consider that such a communication is an internal rather than an external
communication. Therefore, such communications cannot be intercepted pursuant to
a section 8 (4) warrant; they may not be intercepted in bulk. The communication
neither originates nor terminates outside the British Islands. Therefore it is not sent or
received outside the British Islands (for the purposes of Section 20).

7

19.	The contrary is only arguable by interposing an additional (assumed) ‘sender’ and
‘recipient’ into the chain of communication. Thus it might be argued that an email
which travels from a British based computer to a US server, and then returns from
the US server to another British computer, is being sent and received by the US
server. We consider that this would be an artificial construction, which does not
reflect the language or intention of the statutory framework.

20.	The artificiality of that reasoning is exposed by the example of a mobile telephone
call between two persons based in the UK. The signal may travel via a satellite,
which is clearly not in the British Isles. However, if use of a satellite system makes a
communication ‘external’, then the mobile phone system would be ‘external’ to the
British Isles. That is certainly not what the statutory framework envisaged or intends.

21.	We are reinforced in that conclusion by the Home Office Interception of
Communications Code of Practice (issued pursuant to section 71 of RIPA) which
states (Chapter 5 page 22):

“External communications are defined by the Act to be those which are sent or
received outside the British Islands. They include those which are both sent and
received outside the British Islands, whether or not they pass through the British
Islands in the course of their transit. They do not include communications both
sent and received in the British Islands, even if they pass outside the British
Islands en route." (emphasis added)

22.	That view also accords with the approach of the Court of Justice of the European
Union (‘the CJEU’) in the analogous field of data protection. In Case C-101/01
Lindqvist [2003] ECR I-12971, the CJEU held that placing information on a website
did not constitute transferring that data to third countries outside the EU, even if the
server hosting the website was in a third country (see, in particular, paras 67-71). It is
relevant to note that the finding of the CJEU was in accordance with the submissions
of the UK government, which argued that there was no transfer of data outside the
EU (para 55).

23.	That was also the view adopted by Lord Bassam, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary

for the Home Office who spoke in support of the Bill which became RIPA in the

House of Lords. He encouraged other speakers to support the Bill by reference to

precisely this point (HL Deb, 19 June 2000, c102):

“The noble Lord Phillips, made two specific points which to my mind were questions.
At one stage he asked if a warrant could be treated as external merely because it
was routed outside the British Islands. I have read the definition of ‘external
communication.’ Clause 19 defines an external communication as...

8

That does not mean that a communication sent and received inside the British Islands
may be deemed to be external simply because it takes an international route. It must
be sent or received at appoint outside the British Islands. I hope that clarifies that
issue, which seemed to be of particular concern.”

24.	We are conscious of the limited circumstances in which it is permissible to rely on
statements made in Parliament, when interpreting a statute (see Pepper (Inspector of
Taxes v Hart [1993] A.C. 593). Nonetheless, given that the provision itself is tolerably
clear and given the Home Office’s view of the position, we conclude that the only
credible interpretation of the statutory provisions is that the communications
described in scenario (a) are internal.

25.	The other possibility we have considered is that GCHQ has located the interception
‘infrastructure’ on a transatlantic cable in order to argue that the cable is outside of
the jurisdiction. In that case, the security services might contend that the interception
is "effected by conduct” outside the UK (the words used at the start of section 8(4) of
RIPA) and thereby seek to evade the limitations of RIPA. We seriously doubt whether
a court would accept that argument, not least because there would still be conduct
connected with the interception in the UK. However, even if such an argument were
successfully pursued, there would still be an issue as to whether or not the activity
was lawful for the purposes of the European Convention on Human Rights (‘the
Convention’). We address that issue below.

26.	In summary therefore, RIPA only entitles the UK security services to intercept bulk
contents data where at least one party to the communication is located outside the
British Isles. Thus the activities described in scenario (a) are unlawful as contrary to
RIPA.

Contents and Communications Data

27.	The second critical distinction within RIPA is the different treatment of ‘contents’ and
‘communications’ data. Communications data are made up of ‘traffic data’ and "any
information which includes none of the contents of a communication (apart from any
information falling within paragraph a) and is about the use made by any person... in
connection with the provision to or use by any person of any telecommunications
service.” (section 21 (4) (b). ‘Traffic data are defined as:

"2 (9) any data identifying or purporting to identify any person, apparatus or location
to or from which the communication is or may be transmitted;

(b) any data identifying or selecting, or purporting to identify or select, apparatus
through which, or by means of which, the communication is or may be transmitted,

9

(c)	any data comprising signals for the actuation of apparatus used for the purposes
of a telecommunication system for effecting (in whole or in part) the transmission of
any communication, and

(d)	any data identifying the data or other data as data comprised in or attached to a
particular communication."

Communications data are sometimes referred to as metadata, but we use the term
‘communications data’ since it is employed in RIPA.

28.	The Act imposes many fewer restrictions on interception of communications data.
They may be intercepted, pursuant to an ‘authorisation’ (not warrant) (section 22):

a.	“In the interests of national security;

b.	For the purpose of preventing or detecting crime or of preventing disorder;

c.	In the interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom;

d.	In the interests of public safety

e.	For the purpose of protecting public health;

f.	For the purpose of assessing or collecting any tax...

g.	For the purpose, in an emergency, of preventing death or injury...

h.	For any purposes... which is specified for the purposes of this subsection by an order
made by the Secretary of State. ”

29.	As with the interception of communications data, the authorisation must be
proportionate to what is sought to be achieved (section 22 (5)).

30.	Authorisations do not take effect until they are approved by a Justice of the Peace
(section 23A). They may be made by a wide range of ‘designated persons’ within the
police, National Crime Agency, HMRC and other bodies (sections 22-25).

31.	In relation to communications data, RIPA draws no distinction between internal and
external interception. Assuming that an authorisation is in other respects lawfully
issued, GCHQ could obtain and retain mass communications data. There would be
no reason (other than convenience) for them to do so via the transatlantic cable; they
could intercept that communication on the UK mainland.

32.	RIPA further imposes a number of restrictions on the manner in which contents and
communications data may be held (addressed in part B below), and also contains the
mechanisms by which the security services will be overseen. Part IV provides for the
existence of an Information Commissioner and an Investigatory Powers Tribunal,
before whom the actions of the security services may be challenged.

Is the statutory framework lawful?

10

33.	The primary ground on which the lawfulness of RIPA might be challenged is in

respect of the right to privacy under the European Convention for Human Rights

(‘ECHR’). Article 8 of the Convention provides:

“8.1 Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and
correspondence.

8.2 There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right
except such as in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society
in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well being of the
country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals
and for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

34.	Interception of contents and/or communications data is clearly an interference with
the Article 8 rights of the individual concerned. Therefore in order to be lawful, the
interference must be ‘in accordance with the law’, pursuant to a legitimate aim and
proportionate in the circumstances.

35.	The requirement to be ‘in accordance with the law’ will not be satisfied by merely

asserting that a particular act is allowed under the statutory framework. That statutory

framework itself must be of sufficient ‘quality’. In Malone v United Kingdom

(Application No 8691/79), the ECtHR held that (para 67):

“... ‘in accordance with the law’ does not merely refer back to the domestic law but
also relates to the quality of the law requiring it to be compatible with the rule of law...
there must be a measure of legal protection in domestic law against arbitrary
interferences by public authorities with the rights safeguarded in paragraph 1.
Especially where the power of the executive is exercised in secret, the risks of
arbitrariness are evident... the requirement of foreseeability cannot mean that an
individual should be enabled to foresee when the authorities are likely to intercept his
communications so that he can adapt his conduct accordingly. Nevertheless, the law
must be sufficiently clear in its terms to give citizens an adequate indication as to the
circumstances in which and the conditions on which public authorities are empowered
to resort to this secret and potentially dangerous interference with the right to respect
for private life and correspondence..."

36.	The Court concluded that the law (as then in force) was not sufficiently precise and
clear as to how and when the state could lawfully exercise its powers of interception.

37.	Many of the same issues were canvassed again in Liberty v United Kingdom
(Application No. 58243/00). The case concerned the statutory framework which was
in force immediately prior to the introduction of RIPA. That framework allowed for the
interception of telephone calls between Ireland and the UK. The ECtHR reiterated
that the requirement that a statutory framework is ‘in accordance with the law’,
required more than simply having a basis in domestic law. It also “refers to the quality
of the law in question” (paragraph 59). The statutory framework and guidance must
be compatible with the rule of law and accessible to the individual citizen. The citizen

11

should be able to foresee its consequences for him. In the case of interception,

where the executive’s discretion is so wide, it was particularly important to have clear

rules to avoid the risk of arbitrariness (para 95):

“In its case-law on secret measures of surveillance, the Court has developed the
following minimum safeguards that should be set out in statute law in order to avoid
abuses of power: the nature of the offences which may give rise to an interception
order; a definition of the categories of people likely liable to have their telephones
tapped; a limit on the duration of telephone tapping; the procedure to be followed for
examining, using and storing the data obtained; the precautions to be taken when
communicating the data to other parties; and the circumstances in which recordings
may or must be erased or the tapes destroyed. ”

38.	The ECtHR noted that the pre-RIPA legislation gave the Secretary of State the power
to warrant interception of ‘such external communications as are described in the
warrant.’ That was too broad a power: it led to the result that almost all external
communications transmitted by submarine cables could be intercepted.4
Furthermore, the Secretary of State exercised a wide discretion as to which of those
communications should then be analysed: they were determined by reference to
broad categories such as “national security.” The pre-RIPA framework also failed to
provide any detailed description of the arrangements made for the examination,
storage and destruction of material that was intercepted. Accordingly, the ECtHR
concluded that the pre-RIPA code was not sufficiently clear to provide adequate
protection against arbitrary interference with the applicant’s Article 8 rights.

39.	RIPA itself has recently been examined by the ECtHR in Kennedy v United Kingdom
(Application No. 26839/05). It is important to note that the case concerned the
interception of the contents of an individual’s internal correspondence; it did not
address external communications. The Court held that:

a.	The phrases ‘national security’ and ‘serious crime’ were sufficiently clear
justifications for public authorities rely on when justifying the grounds for an
act of surveillance (para 159);

b.	A warrant for internal interception must specify the person or premises under
consideration. That was sufficiently clear, from the perspective of the putative
victim. “Indiscriminate capturing of vast amounts of communications is not
permitted under the internal communications provisions of RIPA.” (paragraph
160).

4	Note the contrast between the finding in respect of mass interception (unlawful) in Liberty and the
finding in respect of ‘strategic interception’ (inadmissible) in the earlier case of Weber and Saravia v
Germany (Application No. 54934/00).

12

c.

The provisions on duration, renewal and cancellation were sufficiently clear
and comprehensive (paragraph 161);
d. The safeguards presented by the presence of the Information Commissioner
and the IPT provide a sufficient level of scrutiny to UK surveillance activities
(paragraphs 166-7).

40.	The implications of both the Liberty and Kennedy cases are addressed in detail in the
Big Brother Watch application which is currently pending before the ECtHR. We
consider that the finding in Kennedy is, at least currently, determinative of the legality
of the Section 8 (2) and (3) framework for internal communications. The ECtHR was
not prepared to find a violation of Article 8. We consider that the judgment is not
determinative for the purposes of scenario (a) because scenario (a) entails
interception of bulk internal contents data contrary to RIPA.

41.	Furthermore, Kennedy does not determine the position in respect of interception of
external communications (section 8 (4)) or communications data. The ECtHR
expressly relied on the fact that the provisions under challenge did not allow for the
capture of large volumes of interception data. As set out above, RIPA does allow for
that in respect of both external contents data and also in respect of communications
data.

42.	Accordingly, it is appropriate to ask whether the ECtHR would be likely to treat
interception of external contents and of all communications data as more closely akin
to that which it considered in Liberty (where it found a violation) or Kennedy (no
violation).

43.	In our view the RIPA provisions in respect of external content data and all
communications data are clearly more closely analogous to the situation in Liberty. In
particular, the Secretary of State has a wide discretion to determine what should be
intercepted: she only has to describe the intercepted material and state that the
interception is necessary. The outcome is very similar to that which the ECtHR
considered in Liberty: mass interception of all material passing through submarine
cables.

44.	On the other hand, we note that the ECtHR has accepted (in Kennedy) that RIPA
provides a satisfactory regime concerning the storage, retention and destruction of
contents data.

13

45.	Taking all of the factors into account, we conclude that the statutory framework in
respect of the interception of external contents data is very probably unlawful. It
provides too wide a discretion to the Secretary of State in respect of the categories
and kinds of documents that can be retained. All that has to be identified is the kind
of document in question. In theory, and perhaps in practice, the Secretary of State
may order the interception of all material passing along a transatlantic cable. If that is
the case, then RIPA provides almost no meaningful restraint on the exercise of
executive discretion in respect of external communications.5

46.	Turning to the position in respect of communication data (both internal and external),
we note that RIPA is now 13 years old. As discussed above, the statute draws a
sharp distinction between content and communications data. That distinction derives
(at least to some extent) from the traditional ‘postal’ distinction between the address
on the envelope and its contents. However, the significance of that boundary has
been eroded by the realities modern internet usage. Communications data now
encompasses each individual URL visited, the contents of an individual’s Twitter and
Facebook address lists, messages posted on social media websites and numerous
other significant elements of an individual’s online private life. Given modern trends in
internet use, the binary distinction between contents and communications data has
become increasingly artificial. Many of the most ‘important’ aspects of an individual’s
online ‘private life’ can be accessed via their communications data or ‘metadata’.

47.	RIPA requires only that the authorisation describes the communications data to be
intercepted. Those authorisations can be ‘signed off’ by a wide variety of public
bodies and persons. As a result, it allows for the mass interception of critical aspects
of UK citizens’ online ‘private life’. Even with such safeguards and review
mechanisms as RIPA provides, it offers insufficient clarity about the circumstances in
which the executive may or may not authorise interception of communications data.
In short, the rules concerning communications data are too uncertain and do not
provide sufficient clarity to be ‘in accordance with the law.’

48.	As noted at paragraph 25 above, we have also considered briefly the possibility that
GCHQ is intercepting data on the transatlantic cable so as to argue that it is outside
of the jurisdiction and, therefore, not subject to RIPA at all. For the reasons set out in

5

The IPT must have proceeded on the assumption that section 8(4) interception is lawful in case
IPT/01/77. However, the issue does not appear to have been the subject of detailed consideration
there, and in any event the case pre-dates the important ECtHR judgments in Liberty and Kennedy.

14

Liberty, we consider the mass interception of communications via a transatlantic
cable to be unlawful, and that these conclusions would apply even if some or all of
the interception is taking place outside UK territorial waters. In any event, we note
that, during a debate on interception of data transferred via submarine cables that
James Brokenshire (Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home
Department) stated that GCHQ does not carry out interception outside of the scope
of RIPA.6

49.	In conclusion, in Liberty the ECtHR cited the mass interception of data, in the course
of transmission via submarine cables, as one of the flaws of the pre-RIPA regime.
We consider that the mass interception of external contents and communications
data is unlawful for the reasons identified in Liberty. The indiscriminate interception of
data, solely by reference to the request of the executive, is a disproportionate
interference with the private life of the individuals concerned.

(B)	RETENTION AND USE OF COMMUNICATIONS DATA

50.	The Data Protection Act 1998 (‘DPA’) sets out a series of restrictions on the use to
which ‘personal data’ may be put. However, section 28 of the Act provides:

“National security

(1)	Personal data are exempt from any of the provisions of -

a.	The data protection principles

b.	Parts II, III and V and

c.	Sections 54A and section 55

If the exemption from that provision is required for the purpose of safeguarding
national security.

(2)	Subject to subsection (4) a certificate signed by a Minister of the Crown certifying
that exemption from all or any of the provisions mentioned in subsection (1) is or
at any time was required for the purpose there mentioned in respect of any
personal data shall be conclusive evidence of that fact...”

51.	We have no information as to whether or not the Secretary of State has issued
relevant section 28 notices. Nonetheless, what follows is based on the assumption
that the Secretary of State may (and possibly has) taken some aspects of the
intercept ‘programme’ outside of the scope of the DPA.

52.	Section 15 of RIPA deals with the use of material acquired pursuant to an
interception warrant (ie content data and possibly some related communications
data). Subsection 2 requires that the data are not viewed by more persons than is
necessary for the authorised purpose. Subsection 3 requires that, once the material

HC Deb, 31 October 2013, c381WH.

15

is no longer necessary for its authorised purpose, it should be destroyed. Subsection
4 provides:

“(4) For the purposes of this section something is necessary for the authorised
purposes if, and only if-

(a)	it continues to be, or is likely to become, necessary as mentioned in section 5(3);

(b)	it is necessary for facilitating the carrying out of any of the functions under this
Chapter of the Secretary of State;

(c)	it is necessary for facilitating the carrying out of any functions in relation to this
Part of the Interception of Communications Commissioner or of the Tribunal;

(d)	it is necessary to ensure that a person conducting a criminal prosecution has the
information he needs to determine what is required of him by his duty to secure the
fairness of the prosecution; or

(e)	it is necessary for the performance of any duty imposed on any person by the
Public Records Act 1958 or the Public Records Act (Northern Ireland) RIPA itself
places very few limits on the uses to which mass intercept data may be put."

53.	Section 16 imposes some further safeguards for certified warrants under section 8

(4)	(external communications):

“(1) For the purposes of section 15 the requirements of this section, in the case of a
warrant in relation to which there is a section 8(4) certificate, are that the intercepted
material is read, looked at or listened to by the persons to whom it becomes available
by virtue of the warrant to the extent only that it-

(a)	has been certified as material the examination of which is necessary as
mentioned in section 5(3)(a), (b) or (c); and

(b)	falls within subsection (2).

(2)	Subject to subsections (3) and (4), intercepted material falls within this subsection
so far only as it is selected to be read, looked at or listened to otherwise than
according to a factor which-

(a)	is referable to an individual who is known to be for the time being in the
British Islands; and

(b)	has as its purpose, or one of its purposes, the identification of material
contained in communications sent by him, or intended for him.

(3)	Intercepted material falls within subsection (2), notwithstanding that it is selected
by reference to any such factor as is mentioned in paragraph (a) and (b) of that
subsection, if-

(a)	it is certified by the Secretary of State for the purposes of section 8(4) that
the examination of material selected according to factors referable to the
individual in question is necessary as mentioned in subsection 5(3)(a), (b) or

(c)	; and

(b)	the material relates only to communications sent during a period specified
in the certificate that is no longer than the permitted maximum.

(3A) In subsection (3)(b) ‘the permitted maximum’ means-

(a)	in the case of material the examination of which is certified for the
purposes of section 8(4) as necessary in the interests of national security, six
months; and

(b)	in any other case, three months.

(4)	Intercepted material also falls within subsection (2), notwithstanding that it is
selected by reference to any such factor as is mentioned in paragraph (a) and (b) of
that subsection, if-

(a)	the person to whom the warrant is addressed believes, on reasonable
grounds, that the circumstances are such that the material would fall within
that subsection; or

(b)	the conditions set out in subsection (5) below are satisfied in relation to
the selection of the material.

(5)	Those conditions are satisfied in relation to the selection of intercepted material if-

16

(a)	it has appeared to the person to whom the warrant is addressed that there
has been such a relevant change of circumstances as, but for subsection
(4)(b), would prevent the intercepted material from falling within subsection
(2);

(b)	since it first so appeared, a written authorisation to read, look at or listen
to the material has been given by a senior official; and

(c)	the selection is made before the end of [ the permitted period ] 3.

(5A) In subsection (5)(c) ‘the permitted period’ means-

(a)	in the case of material the examination of which is certified for the
purposes of section 8(4) as necessary in the interests of national security, the
period ending with the end of the fifth working day after it first appeared as
mentioned in subsection (5)(a) to the person to whom the warrant is
addressed; and

(b)	in any other case, the period ending with the end of the first working day
after it first so appeared to that person.

(6)	References in this section to its appearing that there has been a relevant change
of circumstances are references to its appearing either-

(a)	that the individual in question has entered the British Islands; or

(b)	that a belief by the person to whom the warrant is addressed in the
individual's presence outside the British Islands was in fact mistaken."

54.	Section 23 sets out some of the limitations on the retention and use of
‘communications data’. Thus they may not be disclosed to anyone other than the
person who issued the notice or an individual specified in the notice (subsection 3).
They may not be retained or disclosed beyond a period of one month (subsection 4).
However, that month long period may be extended by a renewal application
(subsection 7).

55.	We are particularly asked whether data that have been intercepted may be submitted
to ‘pattern of life analysis.’ We understand that pattern of life analysis involves the
gathering together of a large body of data about a particular individual. In this context
it ordinarily refers to communications data: who does the individual communicate
with, which websites do they visit, what are their associations and interests?
However, it could refer to contents data as well: what do they say to their associates?

56.	RIPA does not place any restrictions on the uses to which intercept material might be
put (other than its admissibility in court). Therefore all three categories of data
(internal contents data; external contents data and communications data) may in
principle be subjected to pattern of life analysis, as long as those data are lawfully
held. We address below the implications of the Article 8 case law on the legality of
this statutory regime.

57.	RIPA also places no express restriction on members of the Security Services
retaining and analysing data of ‘non-suspects’. Where contents data are obtained in

17

relation to a particular subject it may be unlikely, but remains possible, that the
person is a non-suspect. In respect of external data, the only restriction (under
section s 8 (4) and 22 (3)) is that those data must have fallen within the description of
data to be intercepted. For example, they must have contained a particular keyword,
used a particular server or been directed to a particular individual or group of
individuals. Once the data are lawfully within the possession of GCHQ, RIPA
contains no restrictions on their use.

Is the statutory framework lawful?

58.	The Article 8 case law has provided a clear line of authority concerning the use to

which intercept material may be put. In Liberty the ECtHR criticised the lack of

restrictions placed on the uses to which intercepted data might be put under the pre-

RIPA regime. In Kennedy the Court found that:

“As regards the procedure for examining, using and storing the data, the Government
indicated in its submissions that, under RIPA, an intercepting agency could, in
principle, listen to all intercept material collected. The Court recalls its conclusion in
Liberty at [65] that the authorities’ discretion to capture and listen to captured material
was very wide. However, that case, unlike the present case, involved external
communications, in respect of which data were captured indiscriminately. Contrary to
the practice under the Interception of Communications Act 1985 concerning external
communications, interception warrants for internal communications under RIPA relate
to one person or one set of premises only, thereby limiting the scope of the
authorities’ discretion to intercept and listen to private communications. Moreover,
any captured data which are not necessary for any of the authorised purposes must
be destroyed."

59.	RIPA imposes a fuller and clearer framework for the retention, viewing and
destruction of intercepted content data than that which applied previously. In
particular, it restricts the number of persons that might view any intercepted material
and requires that the number of copies made must be no more than the minimum
necessary (section 15 (2)). The material must also be destroyed when there are no
longer any grounds for retaining it (15 (3)).

60.	However, it is clear from the quotation set out above that the ECtHR’s conclusions in
Kennedy were influenced (at least in part) by the fact that the data in question were
targeted and limited in scope: they were internal contents data. The restrictions on
use and retention provide sufficient protection in those circumstances.

61.	In our view the position in respect of mass data (external contents data or
communications data) is different. We consider it well arguable that where large
volumes of data are being retained, including the data of ‘non-suspects’, there should

18

be more stringent safeguards concerning the uses and destruction of those data. The
arguments are relatively finely balanced,7 but in our view a court would probably hold
that the restrictions on retention, storage and reproduction of external contents data
and communications data are insufficiently robust, and that the UK is therefore in
violation of its Article 8 obligations.

(C)	DATA SHARING

62.	Under scenario (c) we are asked whether it is lawful for intercepted data to be
transferred to the security services of another foreign power, for example the NSA.

63.	RIPA only provides a ‘light touch’ framework for the transfer of data to third party
powers. Section 15 (2) and (3) restrict the number of persons (within the UK) who
may view intercepted contents data (and related communications data) and require
that the data are destroyed when there are no longer any grounds for retaining them.
However, subsection (6) removes those restrictions where the data are to be
transferred overseas:

“Arrangements in relation to interception warrants which are made for the purposes of
subsection (1) -

(a) Shall not be required to secure that the requirements of subsections (2)
and (3) are satisfied in so far as they relate to any of the intercepted
material or related communications data, or any copy of any such
material or data, possession of which has been surrendered to any
authorities of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom;...”

64.	The only restriction on the use of such data transferred overseas is provided by
section 15(7):

“The requirements of this subsection are satisfied in the case of a warrant if it
appears to the Secretary of State -

(a) That requirements corresponding to those of subsection (2) and (3) will
apply, to such extent (if any) as the Secretary of State thinks fit, in
relation to any of the intercepted material or related communications data
possession of which or of any copy of which is surrendered to the
authorities in question...”

65.	Furthermore, the Secretary of State must determine that there are mechanisms in
place in the receiver state to prevent a disclosure in court, contrary to section 17.

66.	As a result, the Secretary of State has an extremely wide discretion to determine
whether or not the requirements of subsections (2) and (3) need apply at all. There

7 In particular, we note that the contrary argument receives some support from the Decision of the
IPT in IPT/01/77. However, that Decision pre-dates the judgments in both Liberty and Kennedy, and
can be distinguished for that reason.

19

are no restrictions on the transfer of data obtained under an interception warrant
beyond those that the Secretary of State considers necessary.

67.	The position in respect of communications data is again materially different. RIPA
makes no express reference to transfer of such data. Section 15 is said to apply only
to interception ‘warrants’ (ie it does not apply to data obtained under an
authorisation). The consequence might either be that there are no restrictions on
transfer or that no transfer to other governments is authorised at all.

68.	We consider that the better view is that RIPA does not authorise transfer of
communications data to other governments. RIPA makes provision for transfer of
data obtained pursuant to warrants. It also sets out which individuals may receive
(via disclosure) material obtained pursuant to a section 22 and 23
authorisation/notice. Therefore, the best reading of the statute is that it does not allow
for the transfer of communications data obtained under an authorisation.

69.	Scenario (c) proceeds on the basis that the UK government may share
communications data, obtained via interception, with other governments (in particular
the US government). The only conceivable basis on which such a transfer could be
lawful if it is not sanctioned by RIPA is that it is conducted pursuant to the Crown’s
common law powers. Whilst it is well-established that the Crown has such powers
(unlike statutory public bodies who may also collect communications data under
authorisations),8 we seriously question the propriety of the government relying on
non-statutory (and hence necessarily unwritten and uncertain) powers in this field.

Is the statutory framework lawful?

70.	When data are transferred to another authority, that constitutes a fresh interference
with an individual’s Article 8 rights. That interference must be assessed on a free-
standing basis (Weber v Germany (Application No. 54934/00) para 79)).

71.	There are powerful reasons why security services in different states should be able to
co-operate with one another. Many of the threats addressed by the security services
are trans-national in nature. Given that some intercept data may be lawfully obtained

8 On the relationship between prerogative and statutory powers see the speeches of Lords Hoffman
and Bingham in R (Bancoult) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (No 2)

[2008] UKHL 61.

20

and transferred, it is reasonable to ask what safeguards might be put in place to
protect the right to privacy of the individuals concerned? Those safeguards might be
set out in either a Memorandum of Understanding (‘MoU’) or a bilateral agreement
between the UK and US governments.

72.	RIPA itself envisages that the UK government may enter into MoUs that relate to the
provision of mutual assistance in this area. All requests for assistance, where such
agreements exist, must be made with lawful authority (section 1 (4)).

73.	In principle the government could either:

a.	Insist that data transferred is held, used and destroyed by a foreign
government to the same standards and on the same basis that it is held by
the UK government; or

b.	Enter into an MoU or other agreement that imposes appropriate restrictions
on the use, retention and destruction of the data; or

c.	Leave the question of data use to the unfettered discretion of the Secretary of
State; or

d.	Impose no restrictions on transfers to other security services whatsoever.

74.	RIPA adopts the third option. We consider that such an approach is not sufficient for
at least three reasons. First, the transfer of private data is a significant interference
with an individual’s Article 8 rights. That interference will only be lawful when
proportionate. One aspect of that proportionality assessment must include the
retention and use of the data once transferred. Secondly, the ECtHR has held on
more than one occasion that surveillance, and the use of surveillance data, is an
area in which governments must conduct themselves in a transparent and
‘predictable’ manner. The current framework is uncertain: it relies on the discretion of
one individual.

75.	Thirdly, on a pragmatic level, given the degree of data transfer between international
security services, there is a real possibility that the NSA might function as GCHQ’s
unofficial ‘backup’ service. If GCHQ is not entitled to hold onto data itself, it might
transfer it to the NSA. In time, and if relevant, that data might be transferred back to
GCHQ. Without strong guidelines and scrutiny, the two services might support each
other to (in effect) circumvent the requirements of their domestic legislation. We are
aware that the framework governing the gathering and storage of data by the NSA is
currently under review and that President Obama has recently announced certain

21

reforms. Once those reforms are fully developed, it may be necessary to revisit this
aspect of our Advice.

76.	Therefore, we consider that RIPA probably allows the unfettered transfer of data to
the NSA, checked only by the views of the executive. That is not ‘in accordance with
the law’, and is therefore contrary to Article 8 and unlawful.

77.	We also consider that, if GCHQ transfers communications data to other governments
it does so without any statutory restrictions. Such transfers are a disproportionate
interference with the Article 8 rights of the individuals concerned. There are no
restrictions, checks or restraints on the transfer of that data.

78.	If there was a published UK-US MoU or agreement governing the transfer, use and
destruction of data by the NSA, that might go some way towards resolving some of
our concerns. The use of MoUs to address human rights concerns is controversial,
and any proposal would need to be given detailed further consideration.
Nonetheless, we recognise that MoUs have received some degree of sanction from
the ECtHR in some cases,9 and might represent an achievable way forward in
relation to these issues.

(D)	USE OF INTERCEPT DATA TO CARRY OUT DRONE STRIKES

79.	Under scenario (d), we are asked whether mass intercept data may be lawfully
transferred to another state that uses it for the purpose of carrying out a drone strike
conducted outside of a conventional conflict scenario.

80.	There have been a number of Convention cases in recent years that have touched
on this question of principle. In Chahal v United Kingdom (Application no. 22414/93),
the ECtHR held that an individual could not lawfully be deported to a country where
they face a real risk of torture. The UK government cannot disavow responsibility for
the consequences of handing over an individual to a foreign state.

81.	However, in Abu Qatada v United Kingdom (Application no. 8139/09), the UK
government had entered into an MoU with Jordan, which provided that the individual
concerned would not be tortured on his return to Jordan. The ECtHR concluded that

Abu Qatada v United Kingdom (Application no. 8139/09).

22

Abu Qatada could be deported because the MoU was sufficiently robust to secure his
protection.

82.	We are conscious that the argument might be advanced that the United Kingdom
government does not owe any Convention duties to individual victims of drone strikes
in third states (Al-Skeini v United Kingdom (Application no. 55721/07). Furthermore,
there are obvious distinctions between transferring an individual who will be subject
to torture and transferring data that might be used in order to kill. Therefore, it is
certainly arguable that the Convention case law has no application in this context.

83.	However, we are of the opinion that, even if the Convention case law does not apply,
the transfer of data to facilitate a drone strike is likely to be unlawful for the purposes
of English law because the drone strike itself would not be a lawful act, if carried out
by the UK government. Therefore anyone who transfers data to facilitate that strike
will be an accessory to an unlawful act, for the purposes of English law.

84.	The lawfulness, or otherwise, of data transfer for drone strikes was recently
addressed in the case of R (Khan) v Secretary of State for the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office [2014] EWCA Civ 24. The claim was brought by the son of a
man killed by a drone strike in Pakistan. He asserted that:

a.	The drone strike was carried out by the US government;

b.	The drone strike had been initiated using ‘locational intelligence’ provided to
the CIA by GCHQ;

c.	Preventative drone strikes against non-combatants are unlawful, for the
purposes of English law;

d.	Therefore, GCHQ employees providing locational intelligence, that they knew
would be used for the purpose of drone strikes, are at risk of prosecution as
secondary parties to murder.

85.	The court at first instance refused permission for the judicial review on the grounds
that it would not make a declaration as to the lawfulness of the acts of a foreign state.
The court made no finding as to the lawfulness or otherwise of data transfers by
GCHQ staff. The Court of Appeal upheld that decision on 20 January 2014.
Permission was refused on justiciability grounds, but the court did not express a view
on the lawfulness of data transfers in support of a drone strike (paras 16 and 19). We
are mindful of the consequences of the Court of Appeal’s decision, but consider that

23

it does not preclude us from expressing a view on the substantive question of the
legality of the act of transfer.

86.	Individuals participating in war are entitled to kill one another; they can invoke the
defence of ‘combatant immunity’. Both domestic and international law recognise the
status of some individuals as ‘lawful combatants’ engaged in ‘international armed
conflict’. Killing an individual outside of that framework is murder. Assisting in the
killing of an individual outside of that framework is assisting in the act of murder.10

87.	In our view, the drone strikes carried out by the CIA in Yemen and Pakistan (amongst
other places) are not carried out in the context of an ‘international armed conflict’.
The US is not at war with Yemen or Pakistan. The individuals who are targeted are
not, therefore, ‘combatants’ and their killers are not entitled to ‘combatant immunity’.

88.	The US Government has sought to justify the attacks by reference to the doctrine of

‘anticipatory self-defence’. Article 51 of the UN Charter provides:

“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or
collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United
Nations, until the Security Council has taken measures necessary to maintain
international peace and security. Measures taken by Members in the exercise of this
right of self-defence shall be immediately reported to the Security Council and shall
not in any way affect the authority and responsibility of the Security Council under the
present Charter to take at any time such action as it deems necessary in order to
maintain or restore international peace and security."

89.	Proponents of anticipatory self-defence argue that the individuals targeted are a
threat to US interests: they have been or are involved in planning attacks against
targets on the US mainland or overseas. The individuals who are targets of the drone
strikes are not engaged in a conventional war against US forces. Nonetheless, they
are combatants in a wider sense. Therefore, it is argued that an attack on those
individuals is an act of self-defence, even though the individuals themselves do not
(at the moment the strike is made) represent an imminent threat to US interests.11

90.	Furthermore, they rely on the fact that (at least in some cases) the strikes have been
carried out with the consent of the Yemeni and Pakistani authorities.

10	Ministry of Defence, Manual of the Law of Armed Conflict (OUP, 2004), p. 37.

11	See the US Department of Justice Paper, ‘Lawfulness of a Lethal Operation Directed against a US
Citizen who is a Senior Operational Leader of Al-Qa’ida or an Associated Force’ DOJ White Paper
020413.

24

91.	The doctrine of anticipatory self-defence, as argued by the US government, has not
been widely accepted within international law. The doctrine of anticipatory self-
defence provides that, where the target presents an ‘imminent’ or ‘immediate’ threat,
a state may strike first in self-defence. In effect, the attacking party must strike or be
struck. The US government relies on a broader formulation of that principle. They
cannot know, or demonstrate, that the targets of any particular drone strike present
an imminent threat to US interests. In effect, they rely on intelligence and other
information to argue that the targets might present an imminent threat. That broader
formulation of the doctrine has not yet become a part of the consensus of
international law. Indeed, to the contrary, it was the rationale advanced by Israel in
order to justify a pre-emptive bombing strike on an Iraqi nuclear reactor over 30 years
ago. That justification was rejected by the Security Council.12

92.	The UK government has also rejected this formulation of the doctrine of anticipatory
self defence much more recently. In his written report to Prime Minister Tony Blair,
when evaluating the lawfulness of the invasion of Iraq, the Attorney General wrote:

“... I am aware that the USA has been arguing for recognition of a broad doctrine of a
right to use force to pre-empt danger in the future. If this means more than a right to
respond proportionately to an imminent attack (and I understand that the doctrine is
intended to carry that connotation) this is not a doctrine which, in my opinion, exists or
is recognized in international law."

93.	Therefore, we consider that the doctrine of anticipatory self-defence does not provide
a sound legal basis for targeted assassinations, via drone strikes, in United Kingdom
law.13 We are aware of the recent report concerning drone strikes by Ben Emmerson,
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism. We agree with his
conclusion that there needs to be an international dialogue concerning the scope of
anticipatory self-defence and the definition of combatant immunity (see paragraphs
79ff).14 However, in our opinion, current domestic (and international) law has not
embraced the broader version of anticipatory self-defence. The United Kingdom
government does not and could not lawfully carry out drone strikes outside
Afghanistan, such as those carried out by the US government in Yemen and
Pakistan. Accordingly, in our view, if GCHQ transferred data to the NSA in the
knowledge that it would or might be used for targeting drone strikes, that transfer is

12	Security Council Resolution 487 (19.06.81).

13	Whether or not the strikes are lawful, for the purposes of international law is a connected, but not
identical question.

14

http://www.lawfareblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/Emmerson-Report.pdf

25

probably unlawful. The transferor would be an accessory to murder for the purposes
of domestic law.

94.	We are further asked about the precise scope of the obligations owed by the UK
government where it knows or suspects that information which it is disclosing might
be used for an unlawful purpose. We consider that pre-existing case law does not
provide a precisely analogous set of facts.

95.	If the victims of the unlawful act were in the United Kingdom, the UK government
would have an obligation to investigate. The ECtHR has repeatedly held that a
procedural obligation to investigate arises where credible allegations are made that
an individual’s right to life has been breached (Edwards v. The United Kingdom,
Application no. 46477/99 (para. 69); Varnava and Others v. Turkey, (Application no.
16064/90 para 191). However, the victims of the unlawful acts are in a third state and
are not under the ‘effective control’ of the UK government (Al-Skeini v United
Kingdom Application no.55721/07). Arguably, therefore, the UK government does not
owe them any ECHR obligations to investigate.

96.	Furthermore, if the UK government was seeking to rely on evidence in court, that
might have been obtained unlawfully, it would be obliged to carry out an investigation
into the origins of that information. In A and others v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2005] UKHL 72 the House of Lords was divided over the obligations that
should arise where a defendant to proceedings before SIAC raises a credible
argument that information used against them may have been obtained via torture.
The majority held that, the Court must carry out an investigation and satisfy itself (on
the balance of probabilities) that it was not.15 We are aware that the analogy is by no
means a perfect one. The principle laid down in A is a rule of admissibility: it does not
govern the carrying out of anti-terror operations.

97.	In Re McKerr [2004] UKHL 12, the House of Lords held that there was no
freestanding common law obligation to carry out an Article 2 compliant investigation,
where a death occurred before the passage of the Human Rights Act.16 Parliament
has legislated to delineate the scope of the duty to investigate death. Therefore, the
common law will not impose additional obligations beyond that duty. However, Lord

15

There were powerful speeches by the minority (including Lord Bingham’s lengthy speech) which
imposed a higher threshold.

16	See the moderation of that position in In the matter of an application by Brigid McCaughey and
another for Judicial Review (Northern Ireland) [2011] UKSC 20.

26

Steyn obiter dicta also suggested that the principles of customary international law
might still impose an obligation on the United Kingdom to investigate, in cases where
a death did not attract the protection of the ECHR (paras 52-3). Customary
international law, in his argument, forms part of the common law of England and,
therefore, the question could be justiciable in England. Even if it does not, by failing
to carry out an investigation the UK government would be in breach of customary
international law. Needless to say, it would be necessary to demonstrate a sufficient
nexus between an act of the UK government and the death in question.

98.	A separate, but related, principle was articulated by the majority of the ECtHR in Silih
v Slovenia (Application No. 71463/01). The case concerned the death of an individual
who had been killed before the ECHR came into effect. The Court held that, where
the investigation of the death takes place after the Convention has come into force, it
must be compliant with Article 2. The majority also held that:

“163 Secondly, there must exist a genuine connection between the death and the
entry into force of the Convention in respect of the respondent State for the
procedural obligations imposed by art.2 to come into effect.

Thus a significant proportion of the procedural steps required by this provision—
which include not only an effective investigation into the death of the person
concerned but also the institution of appropriate proceedings for the purpose of
determining the cause of the death and holding those responsible to account —will
have been or ought to have been carried out after the critical date.

However, the Court would not exclude that in certain circumstances the
connection could also be based on the need to ensure that the guarantees and
the underlying values of the Convention are protected in a real and effective
manner.”(emphasis added)

99.	The finding in Silih was criticised by the Supreme Court in McCaughey, particularly in
Lord Roger’s dissenting judgment. Nonetheless, they followed it. We are aware that
Silih was concerned with temporal questions of justiciability. However, we consider
that the same principle will arguably apply to spatial questions of justiciability (the
deaths have occurred in Pakistan or Yemen). Unfortunately the various judgments in
McCaughey did not revisit Lord Steyn’s dicta. We consider that both the dicta of Lord
Steyn and the views of the ECtHR in Silih are relevant to the scenario set out in our
instructions. On the facts before us, the UK government knows, or suspects that: (a)
a transfer of data is being made on its territory and (b) that transfer is being carried
out or aided by agents of the UK government. We consider that, pursuant to the
transfer, the agent is likely to become an accessory to murder. On those facts it is
certainly arguable that the government is obliged, pursuant to customary international
law, to take reasonable steps to investigate the transfer and prevent that unlawful

27

act. Alternatively, the ECtHR has held that the obligation to investigate can arise
where it is necessary to protect the underlying values of the ECHR. It is difficult to
imagine a set of circumstances that would be more likely to trigger that requirement.

100.	Furthermore, in R v Registrar General (ex parte Smith) [1991] 2 Q.B. 393, the
Court of Appeal held that Parliamentary legislation should be interpreted in a manner
that did not enable a person to commit or to escape liability for a crime resulting in a
danger to life (affirmed by the Supreme Court in Welwyn Hatfield Council v Secretary
of State for Communities and Local Government [2011] UKSC 15). They held that
public policy would not allow for any other outcome. Being an accessory to murder is
a crime resulting in a danger to life. Therefore, we consider that, in order for the
principle in Smith to be effective, the statutory framework concerned with the
investigation of death should apply to cases of this kind. If there is no current
obligation to investigate deaths of this kind, public policy arguably demands that
there should be. State employees should not be entitled to rely on the gaps in the
current statutory framework to commit serious crime with impunity. The main
obstacle in the way of this argument would be the justiciability issues confronted in
Kahn and addressed at paras [84-5] above. A version of this submission formed the
basis of the claimant’s secondary case, which the Court of Appeal considered was
non-justiciable as impugning the US for the same reasons as they accepted in
relation to the primary case. However, even if the courts would not be prepared to
apply the Smith principle directly, in our view it would be surprising (and undesirable)
if the UK government were able to rely on justiciability arguments so as to evade any
obligation to investigate cases where state employees have potentially become
accessories to murder. Such a result, even if non-justiciable, would be contrary to the
requirements of good governance and public policy.

101.	The precise scope of the duty to investigate which would arise is the subject
of legitimate debate. It might be said that the investigation does not need to meet the
‘high’ threshold imposed by the Article 2 case law. However, we consider that, given
the seriousness of the issues in question, there is no reason why it should not have
to do so. Indeed, if the duty derives from the ECHR or customary international law, it
should. That investigation should inform the contents of any subsequent ‘prevention’
policy.

28

102.	The most obvious mechanism by which the obligation to prevent could be
implemented is via an MoU or other bilateral agreement concerning the uses to
which transferred data might be put. It is impractical to suggest that the government
should obtain undertakings or carry out investigations in respect of each piece of
data transferred. We understand that no such MoU or other agreement exists.
Absent an agreement, and assuming that the data transferred might be used to
target drone strikes, we consider that their transfer is on balance likely to be unlawful.

(E)	DATA HUBS ON UK SOIL

103.	Under scenario (e) we have been provided with two possible situations. Firstly
a UK base (operated under the 1951 NATO Status of Forces Agreement) is used to
transfer data to America. Some of those data have been obtained overseas by
unlawful means. Secondly a UK base is used to transfer data from the mainland USA
to bases overseas. Those data, instructions and orders are used to facilitate and
carry out drone strikes.

104.	The 1951 NATO Status of Forces Agreement provides:

“Article II

It is the duty of a force and its civilian component and the members thereof as well as
their dependents to respect the law of the receiving State, and to abstain from any
activity inconsistent with the spirit of the present Agreement, and, in particular, from
any political activity in the receiving State. It is also the duty of the sending State to
take necessary of measures to that end.

Article VII

1.	Subject to the provisions of this Article,

a.	the military authorities of the sending State shall have the right to exercise
within the receiving State all criminal and disciplinary jurisdiction conferred on
them by the law of the sending State over all persons subject to the military
law of that State;

b.	the authorities of the receiving State shall have jurisdiction over the members
of a force or civilian component and their dependents with respect to offences
committed within the territory of the receiving State and punishable by the law
of that State.

2.

a.	The military authorities of the sending State shall have the right to exercise
exclusive jurisdiction over persons subject to the military law of that State
with respect to offences, including offences relating to its security, punishable
by the law of the sending State, but not by the law of the receiving State.

b.	The authorities of the receiving State shall have the right to exercise
exclusive jurisdiction over members of a force or civilian component and their
dependents with respect to offences, including offences relating to the
security of that State, punishable by its law but not by the law of the sending
state.

29

c.	For the purposes of this paragraph and of paragraph 3 of this Article a
security offence against a State shall include:

i.	treason against the State;

ii.	sabotage, espionage or violation of any law relating to official secrets
of that State, or secrets relating to the national defence of that State

3.	In case where the right to exercise jurisdiction is concurrent the following rules
shall apply:

a.	The military authorities of the sending State shall have the primary right to
exercise jurisdiction over a member of a force or of a civilian component in
relation to

i.	offences solely against the property or security of that State, or
offences solely against the person or property of another member of
the force or civilian component of that State or of a dependent;

ii.	offences arising out of any act or omission done in the performance
of official duty.

b.	In the case of any other offence the authorities of the receiving State shall
have the primary right to exercise jurisdiction.

c.	If the State having the primary right decides not to exercise jurisdiction, it
shall notify the authorities of the other State as soon as practicable. The
authorities of the State having the primary right shall give sympathetic
consideration to a request from the authorities of the other State for a waiver
of its right in cases where that other state considers such waiver to be of
particular importance.

6.	The authorities of the receiving and sending States shall assist each other in the
carrying out of all necessary investigations into offences, and in the collection and
production of evidence, including the seizure and, in proper cases, the handing
over of objects connected with an offence. The handing over of such objects
may, however, be made subject to their return within the time specified by the
authority delivering them."

105.	It is clear from the Agreement that NATO servicemen, on operations
overseas, must act in line with the law of the receiving state (here, UK law). Pursuant
to Article VII, the UK government has exclusive jurisdiction in relation to breaches of
UK law that are not also breaches of US military law.

106.	We turn now to the first situation envisaged under scenario (e). The simplest
set of facts concerns the transfer, via UK soil, of data that have been obtained in
breach of international law. For the purpose of what follows we assume that US
servicemen in the UK play an active part in the transfer of those data.

107.	We are not aware of any authorities that deal directly with this point. There
are two possible analogies which might assist. First, if the United States forces were
transferring illegal physical goods (such as contraband) via UK soil, that would be a
breach of the Forces Agreement. Article XI (and elsewhere) requires NATO forces to
obey the customs laws of the receiving country (with some exceptions).

30

108.	A second possible analogy arises out of the case of El-Masri v Former
Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia (Application no.39630/09). The ECtHR held that
the Republic of Macedonia had breached the Article 3 rights of a German citizen
whom they had detained and then transferred to the CIA for on-transfer to
Afghanistan. He was interrogated and tortured there. The Court’s decision relied on
the Macedonian government’s knowledge of the destination of the flight they put him
on, the lack of a CIA warrant for his arrest and the Macedonian government’s
knowledge of the rendition process from publicly available information at the time
(paras 215-22).

109.	We consider that the findings in El-Masri do not easily map onto the facts in
this case. The Macedonian government knew, in effect, that the transfer of Mr El-
Masri was a transfer to torture. Here, the UK government has stated that it does not
know what support to US operations is being provided from RAF Croughton [HC
Deb, 25 March 2013, c939W]. Furthermore, in El-Masri there was a specific
individual whose Article 3 rights had been violated.

110.	In our view, the contraband/trafficking analogy provides a clearer and more
useful comparator. If the US government was shipping unlawful goods via the UK
(via a NATO base), and the UK government was aware of that fact, then the US
forces would be in breach of the Agreement. The UK government would have the
right to object and ultimately to press charges.

111.	Applying those principles to the transfer of drone strike data and orders, the
outcome is similar. The UK government is entitled to object, and ultimately to bring a
prosecution, where visiting forces break English law. However, they have no
obligation to do so under the Forces Agreement: they ‘may’ do so. Ultimately the
responsibility to press charges against US servicemen lies with the Director of Public
Prosecutions (if they consider that it is in the public interest to do so). Alternatively,
the UK government might object that the transfer is in breach of any MoU between
the two states, assuming that such an MoU exists.

112.	However, we are aware that a prosecution of that kind is extremely unlikely to
occur. In particular we note that the UK government does not appear to know what
takes place, with any degree of detail, on those bases. It appears that an RAF liaison
officer is assigned to each base (HC Deb, 25 March 2013, c939-940W). However,
the scope of their duties and powers to review or investigate, if any, are unclear. We

31

note that none are set out in the Visiting Forces Act, and there is no obligation to
monitor compliance with UK law or indeed report on the activities of NATO partners
at the bases. As noted above, in answer to a Parliamentary Question, in March 2013,
the Minister of State for the Ministry of Defence (Andrew Robathan) could not tell
Parliament whether or not the US forces were undertaking activities in connection
with the US drone programme from RAF Croughton (HC Deb, 25 March 2013, c939-
940W).

113.	In practical terms, we consider it unlikely that the UK government will have
any knowledge of what data is passing through UK communications hubs on a day to
day basis. Therefore, even though they have a power to prosecute, that power is
highly unlikely to be exercised. Furthermore, whilst it is possible to bring a judicial
review to challenge a decision of the DPP not to prosecute, such a claim would be
very unlikely to succeed (see R v DPP [2001] QB 330 per Bingham CJ at 343 ff).

114.	We are instructed that consideration is currently being given to amendments
to the Visiting Forces Act (1952) and RIPA which would introduce basic reporting
requirements on RAF Commanders and a new scrutiny group present on US bases
and/or the Information Commissioner. In our view, and pending review of the existing
legislative framework, such amendments might go some way to ensuring that
Ministers are informed about data passing through the UK. This, in turn, would assist
the government to monitor compliance with UK law and make informed decisions
about whether there is a need for an MoU or other multilateral agreement between
NATO partners.

Brick Court Chambers
22 January 2014

JEMIMA STRATFORD QC
TIM JOHNSTON

32

33