TOP SECRET STRAP1

Recommendations

6.	This high-level architectural analysis has highlighted parts of the solution
architecture which needs immediate attention. There are currently line items in
the unconstrained portfolio build which will help address the three main
concerns. It is recommended that these line items are prioritised in the filter
and twist phase.

•	Big Data. We need to develop an end-end big data strategy which

covers expected data growth, tradecraft, QFD architecture, cloud
architecture, Black Hole, the role of streaming analytics and the
proposed new data centre. A series of experiments should be carried
out between TA, TDB innovation, ICTR and SD to de-risk some of the
possible solutions.

•	Integrated Analytics Framework. We need to converge to a small

number of analytics frameworks for use across our multiple missions
which support the rapid deployment of experimental analytics tools
and provide the APIs required for fused analytics.

•	Security Services. We need to provide an end to end and cohesive

uplift to the capabilities used to support assured information sharing
within and across our enterprise boundaries, with support to the
Information Assurance agenda, ensuring the appropriate accessibility,
releasibility and traceability.

•	Vision and Strategy. The coherence we need in order to deliver against

the drivers needs investment into the development of end to end
technical vision and supporting technology strategies, supporting the
business needs. The current "redness" in Annex 3 demonstrates that
there are some fundamental changes required to the architecture.
Whilst the first three recommendations will address some of the more
urgent symptoms we need to also invest in addressing the underlying
causes.

7.	NSA are already some way down the path of instantiating their new
architecture. Their "2017 Vision: the Future of NSA IT" has a small number of
principles: smart data; virtualization and mobility. As we construct our
equivalent vision we need, as a minimum, to be interoperable with NSA's new
architecture. We should also look to take as much advantage as makes sense
of NSA’s specific implementations.

8.	Finally, please note this report was created over a short period of time with
only limited amounts of effort. There is a need to establish an appropriate
framework that allows a more considered view to be presented as input to
future portfolio builds.

3	of 6

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of lnformatior^c^OO^n^na>^^ub«cUoexemplioni*idOT
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ

TOP SECRET STRAP1