TOP SECRET STRAP1

Introduction

1.	The 2011 Corporate Technology Risk identified our solution architecture as
being one of the contributors to the High risk rating. In recent years a strong
focus on delivery has resulted in an under investment in architecture. This will
eventually have an impact on our ability to deliver.

2.	The December board meeting were concerned that investment decisions
being made in the 2012/13 portfolio build could be non-optimal if architecture
considerations were not taken into account and asked the following question:

“Given our changes in mission and changes in the external environment
(Cyber defence, offensive cyber, increased partnering, increased data
volumes, etc) which parts of our architecture are under most strain and
so carry the most risk to this year’s investment “

3.	Part of the new DCTO role is to define a technology vision and then champion
improvements to the solution architecture at portfolio build time. However, it
will take time to construct that vision. Therefore in the interim a broad brush
approach has been taken in order to allow some immediate advice to be given
to the portfolio.

4.	We have a defined a number of high level change drivers on the architecture
(Annex 1). These are changes in either our mission, ways of doing business or
external technology which are relatively recent and were not taken into
account when our current solution architecture was built. We have also
represented our current solution architecture as a number of high level
elements. We then assessed each change driver against the current solution
architecture and identified those architectural elements most stressed by the
drivers (Annex 3 and Annex 4).

5.	This has been done in a short period of time with only limited amounts of
effort. There are therefore a number of caveats that need to be made:

•	This is a broad brush, high level analysis.

•	Whilst we have consulted as widely as possible, we have inevitably not
managed to consult everyone we would have liked to have involved

•	We have restricted ourselves to the infrastructure and application layers
(and so not explicitly considered the business layer)

•	We are not attempting to define the “to-be” solution architecture. Instead
we have concentrated on identifying risks with the current architecture

2	of 6

Thts information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Informatior^c^OOl^jnc^navJx^ubjecUoexemplionijidOT
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ

TOP SECRET STRAP1