

This document found at:

fbi.doc

Oj?ce oft/?e ?ttomey generaf

Was/iington, (D. C. 20530

PROCEDURES FOR THE DISSEMINATION BY NSA
TO FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS OF INFORMATION FROM ISA ELECTRONIC
SURVEILLANCE OR PHYSICAL SEARCH CONDUCTED BY THE FBI

These procedures have been adopted pursuant to the modi?ed minimization procedures
governing the analysis, retention, and dissemination by National Security Agency (N SA) of any
data received by NSA from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and acquired by the FBI
pursuant to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, 50 U.S.C. 1801-1811, 1821-1829
(FISA). Those modi?ed minimization procedures have been adopted by the Attorney General
and are described in a motion approved by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court on July 22,
2002, and captioned RE ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE AND PHYSICAL SEARCH OF
INTERNATIONAL TERRORIST GROUPS, THEIR AGENTS, AND RELATED 
Those modi?ed minimization procedures state:

Nonpublicly available identity or personally identi?able information concerning United
States persons may be disseminated to foreign governments provided that:

the information to be disseminated is foreign intelligence information; and

the dissemination is approved by the Attorney General, or approved pursuant
to such procedures as the Attorney General may establish for the
dissemination of such information by NSA. (S)

To the extent authorized by the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) and in accordance
with DCI directives, NSA may make such disseminations without speci?c Attorney General
approval subject to the following procedures: (S)

(1) Disseminations to the Governments of the Untied Kingdom, Canada, Australia, or New

Zealand may be made upon the approval of any person designated for such purpose by the
Director of NSA. (S)

(2) Disseminations to other foreign governments may be made upon the approval of the 
Of?ce of General Counsel, upon consideration of the following factors: the national security
bene?t the United States may reasonably expect to obtain from making the dissemination; the
anticipated uses to which the foreign government will put the information; and any potential for
economic injury, physical harm, or other restriction of movement to be reasonably expected from
providing the information to the foreign government. It the proposed recipient(s) of the
dissemination have a history of human rights abuses, that history should be considered in

DRV FM: l23?2
Dated: 24 Feb 98
DECL ON: Xl
SECRETNX l.

SEC 1

assessing the potential for economic injury, physical harm, or other restriction of movement, and
whether the dissemination should be made. In cases where there is a reasonable restriction of
movement: the approval of the Signals Intelligence Director will also be required; and
if dissemination is approved, NSA will undertake reasonable steps to ensure that the
disseminated information will be used in a manner consistent with United States law, including
Executive Order No. 12,333 and applicable federal criminal statutes. (S)

(3) NSA will make a written record of each dissemination approved pursuant to these procedures,
and information regarding such disseminations and approvals shall be made available for review
by the Of?ce of Intelligence Policy and Review, United States Department of Justice, on at least
an annual basis. (S)

APPROVED:

 

John Ashcroft
Attorney General of the United States

DATE: 20 AUG 2002

 

DRV FM: 123?2
Dated: 24 Feb 98
DECL ON: Xl


