 

TO FVEY

   

  (UPDATED 17 MAY

2012)

AURORAGOLD is a team of 5564 developers and wireless SMEs
working on:

Database of Mobile Network Operators (MNOs), networks, and
PWIDs collected from roaming documents (IR.215),

Target development effort against MNOs, roaming hubs, and GSM
Association (GSMA) working groups, and

(U) Fusion of open source, licensed, commercial data with SIGINT to answer
wireless needs.

Sample SIGINT (IR.21) Queries

What |R.21s have we seen for networks within a country or set of
countries?

What have we seen for networks managed by a mobile
network operator?

What |R.21s have we seen for a particular network or set of
networks?

(U) Sample Open Source (Licensed Commercial Data)
Queries

What are all of the cellular network operators within a country
currently in service?

What suppliers have sold equipment to which operators within a
country?

What networks are currently in service/planned within a country
for each operator?

Which network technology equipment exists within a country for
each operator?

TO FVEY

TO FVEY

What is the network name for each network within a country for
each operator?

When was each network placed into service for each operator
within a country?

What cellular network technology GSM, W-CDMA, HSPA,
etc.,) is in service for each operator in a country?

Which frequency spectrum bands are being used by which
operators in a country?

What networks are currently in service/planned for each
operator within a country?

What CDMA or CDMA Wireless Local Loop networks are currently

 

in service/planned for each operator within a countm?
Derived From:

What network license auctions are 1-52
planned within a country? Dated: 20070108

 

 

 

TO FVEY

TO FVEY

Some IR.21 Fields Useful to SIGINT

 

(U) IR.21 Field

Mobile Country
Code 
Mobile Network

(U) What is it?

(U) A decimal digit code which uniquely identifies a
mobile network. The MCC which identifies the
country is used as the first three digits of any user's

(U) How is it used?

(U) Provide unique identification of networks to
identify network boundaries, interfaces, protocols,
software, hardware, etc.

 

Code (MNC) IMSI, followed by the two digit MNC which identifies
the network within that country.
Mobile (U) A number uniquely identifying a subscription in a (U) Allow identification of real phone number dialed
Subscriber GSM or a UMTS mobile network (the telephone
Integrated number to the SIM card in a mobile/cellular phone).

Services Digital
Network Number

 

 

(MSISDN)

TADIG codes (U) A number allocated by the GSMA for use as (U) Identify the network for billing purposes and
primary identifiers, both within file contents and file help identify targets
names. Also used as a more generic entity identifier
in the mobile industry

Signaling (U) A network layer protocol that provides extended (U) Provides routing information within the Public

Connection
Control Part
(SCCP)

routing, flow control, segmentation, connection-
orientation, and error correction facilities in
Signaling System 7 telecommunications networks

Land Mobile Network and provides access to
applications such as 800-call processing and
calling card processing to identify targets and
other information

 

Subscriber
Identity
Authentication

(U) This field indicates whether or not authentication
is performed for roaming subscribers at the start of
GSM service and the type of A5 cipher algorithm
version in use.

It would also show the emergence of
new cipher algorithms and support target analysis,
trending and the development of exploits.

 

Mobile
Application Part
(MAP)

(U) A SS7 protocol which provides an application
layer for the various nodes in GSM and UMTS mobile
core networks and GPRS core networks to
communicate with each other in order to provide
services to mobile phone users. The Mobile
Application Part is the application-layer protocol
used to access the Home Location Register, Visitor
Location Register, Mobile Switching Center,
Equipment Identity Register, Authentication Centre,
Short message service center and Serving GPRS
Support Node (SGSN).

Provides a clearer understanding of
network features when roaming agreement
information is published. Current information about
subscribers, mobility management and
applications can be used for targeting and target
development.

 

 

Network
Element

(U) Specific network components, their
manufacturer, software hardware versions, etc.

This specific information is necessary
for targeting and exploitation. Includes core and

 

TO FVEY

 

TO FVEY

 

 

 

Information radio interface information.

Packet Data (U) Packet Data Services identifies the affected GPRS This data element also provides

Services networks. An Access Point Name is also included in information on the WAP gateway being access and

Information this information. APNs can identify the type of multimedia messaging services gateway lP
service provided by GPRS networks provided to addresses which is useful for target development.
mobile users. APNs also help identify the network Insight into the GPRS Tunneling Protocol versions
and operator's packet network involved in the IR.21 being used within the networks is provided as well.
and could be used for targeting. GPRS, EDGE and HSPA technologies are covered.

 

TO FVEY

 

