TOP SECRET

Behavioural Science Support for JTRIG’s (Joint Threat
Research and Intelligence Group’s) Effects and Online
HUMINT Operations

Mandeep K. Dhami, PhD

Human Systems Group, Information Management Department, Dstl

10 March 2011

1	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

Executive Summary

The importance of influence in cyberspace was highlighted in the recent National
Security Strategy and the Strategic Defence and Security Review (UK Government,
2010a, 2010b). JtRIG provides most of GCHQ’s cyber effects and online HUMINT
capability. It currently lies at the leading edge of cyber influence practice and
expertise.

JTRIG targets a range of individual, group and state actors across the globe who
pose criminal, security and defence threats. JTRIG staff use a range of techniques
to, for example, discredit, disrupt, delay, deny, degrade, and deter. The techniques
include: uploading YouTube videos containing persuasive messages; establishing
online aliases with Facebook and Twitter accounts, blogs and forum memberships for
conducting HUMINT or encouraging discussion on specific issues; sending spoof
emails and text messages as well as providing spoof online resources; and setting up
spoof trade sites.

Chapter 2 presents the findings of interviewees with a sample of 22 JTRIG staff and
seven other staff from GCHQ who support JTRIG’s operations. Based on these
interviewees, the present report concludes that JTRIG’s effects and online HUMINT
capability can be further enhanced by providing behavioural science support and
improving some of JTRIG’s non-technical operational planning and management.

Chapter 3 considers how JTRIG’s effects and online HUMINT operations can be
grounded in scientific theory and evidence from social psychology (i.e., social
cognition, attitudes, persuasive communications, conformity, obedience,
interpersonal relationships, trust and distrust, and psychological profiling), including
its applications to advertising and marketing, and from criminology (i.e., crime
prevention).

Chapter 4 discusses how the effectiveness of JTRIG’s effects and online HUMINT
operations can be enhanced by improving the current process of assessing the risks
associated with conducting operations and the measurement of operational success,
and by providing staff with practice/conduct guidelines.

The present report provides the following seven recommendations for supporting and
improving JTRIG’s effects and online HUMINT capability:

•	Recommendation 1. JTRIG should train its staff to understand and
appropriately apply specific behavioural techniques (see Annexes A to C).

•	Recommendation 2. Dstl should develop a research programme that: (1)
measures the generalisability of specific social influence techniques across
cultural groups representative of the types of targets of interest to defence and
security organisations so that techniques can be applied appropriately. And,

(2) reviews the body of work on influence in cyberspace in order to inform
cyber influence operations.

2	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

•	Recommendation 3. Dstl ought to develop a programme of work that assesses
the feasibility of compiling psychological profiles based on information
available about the individual on the internet so that those conducting online
HUMINT operations can compile and exploit such profiles.

•	Recommendation 4. Dstl ought to develop a programme of work that: (1)
reviews the literature identifying the cost-benefit factors motivating individuals
to become involved in specific crimes (especially online). And, (2) develops a
catalogue of crime prevention techniques that can be applied online.

•	Recommendation 5. JTRIG should design a comprehensive operational risk
assessment process.

•	Recommendation 6. JTRIG should develop a catalogue of measures that
provide reliable and valid data on the effectiveness of its online effects and
HUMINT operations.

•	Recommendation 7. JTRIG should develop relevant guidelines describing best
practice when conducting operations.

The implementation of recommendations 1 and 5 to 7 require more or less immediate
consideration. The implementation of recommendations 2 to 4 refer to delivery of
support in the medium- to long-term.

3	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

Contents

TOP SECRET

Executive Summary	2

1.	Introduction	5

2.	Overview of JTRIG’s Effects and Online HUMINT Operations	8

3.	Behavioural Science Support	16

4.	Non-Technical Operational Planning and Management	23

5.	Conclusions and Recommendations	27

References	31

Annex A	36

Annex B	39

Annex C	41

4	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

1.	Introduction

1.1	JTRIG provides most of GCHQ’s effects capability as well as some of its
intelligence capability. JTRIG focuses on the cyber domain (computers and the
internet), using both open source data and SIGINT.

1.2	JTRIG’s core functions include:

•	Covert internet investigations (e.g., researching selectors or targets)

•	Forensic investigation and analysis

•	Active covert internet operations (including online HUMINT and effects)

•	Covert technical operations

•	Provision of unattributable internet access

•	Development of new (technical) capability

1.3	JTRIG currently comprises approximately 120 staff (excluding integrees) who
are organised into three operational groups (i.e., Rest of the World, Counter-
Terrorism and Support to Military Operations), and two groups with supporting
functions (i.e., Software and Infrastructure Development and Business Oversight).

1.4	The three operational groups can be further sub-divided into teams as follows:

•	Rest of the World:

o Cyber Crime (based in Scarborough)
o Serious Crime

o Cyber Co-ordination and Operations
o Network Defence (based in Bude)
o Iran

o Global (non-Iranian targets)

•	Counter-Terrorism (CT):

o Active CT Operations
o Active Language CT Operations
o CT Covert Internet Investigations
o Forensic Analysis

•	Support to Military Operations (SMO):

o Strategic and Tactical Level Effects Delivery
o Seized Media Exploitation
o Standby Globally Deployable Capability

1.5	The present report focuses on the work conducted by the above teams
(excluding Ct Covert Internet Investigations and Forensic Analysis) because they
represent JTRIG’s online effects and intelligence gathering capability.

1.6	Briefly, the Rest of the World group includes the Iran team that focuses on
Iranian targets. The Global team covers any part of the world not covered by other
teams (and it currently focuses on the middle-east, Africa, Argentina, Russia, and
China). The Serious Crime team covers online drugs and people trafficking (including

5	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

illegal immigration) and online financial crime. The Cyber Crime team works on
malware, online identity fraud/theft, online child exploitation, domestic extremism,
and online credit card fraud/crime. The Cyber Co-ordination and Operations team
focuses on individual websites and state cyber attacks. The Network Defence team
focuses on malware.

1.7	The CT group focuses on Islamic extremism and Irish Republican extremists.

It includes a team of cultural linguists who work in Arabic and who provide cultural
and language capability.

1.8	The SMO group consists of both civilian staff and military integrees, and
currently focuses on the Afghanistan-Pakistan region. It provides strategic level
effects delivery in support of UK and International military partners, tactical support to
UK Special Forces in-theatre, analysis of seized media in support of UK facilities in-
theatre, and deployable exploitation and effects capability for UK forces.

1.9	Together, the above teams engage in covert internet operations to bring about
online HUMINT and effects (defined by GCHQ as "doing things in cyberspace to
make something happen”), as well as researching selectors or targets. The work of
the teams is supported by some of JTRIG’s other core functions (i.e., covert internet
investigations, provision of unattributable internet access, and the development of
new technical capability).

1.10	Within GCHQ, the teams work with the relevant Intelligence Production Teams
(IPTs) who aid in the initiation and planning of operations based on their analysis of
SIGINT, as well as (cultural) linguists (some of whom are native speakers). Several
teams currently collaborate with other agencies including the SIS, MoD’s Technical
Information Operations (TIO), the FCO, Security Service, SOCA, UK Borders,

HMRC, Metropolitan police, and the National Public Order and Intelligence Unit. In
addition, the SMO team works closely with 15 Psyops, JIEDAC, the UK military, and
Special Forces in-theatre. The nature of collaboration can vary from teams being
tasked to perform an effects operation or provide intelligence to them enabling
intelligence agencies to make face-to-face contact with a potential source of HUMINT
or supporting military operations in-theatre.

1.11	Currently, whereas some of the teams and groups (e.g., Cyber Co-ordination
and Operations, Serious Crime, Global, SMO) are primarily tasked to work on
specific targets by GCHQ and external organisations and agencies such as SIS,
SOCA and Special Forces, other teams (e.g., Cyber Crime, CT) primarily work
proactively and opportunistically in searching for targets. However, all teams are
responsive to external tasking. Those who task JTRIG are asked to specify the
expected outcome of an operation, and provide relevant background information.

1.12	Depending on the prioritisation of the task, JTRIG can respond to
requirements for operations on a timescale from a few hours, and operations can be
long-term. Operations are not limited to commercial working hours. Importantly,
JTRIG’s work is bounded by legal and policy requirements, and all effects operations
are subject to approval by Operational Management Groups (OMGs).

6	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

Goals and Method of Present Report

1.13	The main goal of the present report is to provide an assessment of JTRIG’s
behavioural science support requirements for conducting effects and online HUMINT
operations. Given that such support would need to occur within certain bounds, a
secondary goal is to provide an assessment of some of JTRIG’s other (non-technical)
operational planning and management requirements such as risk assessment and
conduct guidelines.

1.14	These two goals were achieved by a combination of data collection from a
sample of JTRIG staff and other staff from GCHQ supporting JTRIG’s operations,
and a brief review of the relevant behavioural science literature. Data collection
involved face-to-face interviews with 29 individuals. Six were interviewed in pairs and
the rest were interviewed individually. Interviews lasted approximately one hour
(range = 45 minutes to two hours).

1.15	Of the 29 interviewees, 22 were staff representing each of the teams in
JTRIG’s three operational groups. Seven were staff from elsewhere within GCHQ
who support JTRIG’s operations (i.e., three staff from the IPTs working with the Iran
and serious crime teams, one native language speaker (cultural linguist) working with
the Iran team, two OMG chairs, and one legal advisor.

1.16	Interviewees from JTRIG’s three operational groups were asked to comment
on the following:

•	Examples of effects and online HUMINT operations

o Targets
o Goals

o Methods/techniques

•	Operational planning and management

o Risk assessment

o Measures of effectiveness/success of operations

•	Staff development

o Past work experience
o Behavioural science needs (if any)

1.17	Interviewees from outside of JTRIG (i.e., GCHQ) were asked to comment
broadly on how they support the JTRIG teams, and how behavioural science input
could (if at all) support their own work as well as JTRIG’s operations.

7	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

2.	Overview of JTRIG’s Effects and Online HUMINT
Operations

2.1	The present chapter provides a summary of the data gathered from the
interviews of a sample of JTRIG staff and staff from GCHQ who support JTRIG’s
effects and online HUMINT operations. Given the main goal of the present report,
only those issues pertaining to influence will be presented here.

Examples of Effects and Online HUMINT Operations

2.2	Operation targets. JTRIG’s operations may cover all areas of the globe. Staff
described operations that are currently targeted at, for example, Iran, Africa,
Argentina, Afghanistan, Pakistan, North Korea, UK, and Eastern Europe, including
Russia. Operations may target specific individuals (e.g., suspect caught in-theatre or
cyber criminal), groups (e.g., Islamic extremists or those engaged in online credit
card fraud), the general population (e.g., Iranians), or regimes (e.g., Zanu PF).

2.3	Operation aims. Staff noted that the overall goals of an operation and the
general content of a communication/message may be dictated by Government policy.
Generally, the language of JTRIG’s operations is characterised by terms such as
"discredit”, promote "distrust,” "dissuade”, "deceive”, "disrupt”, "delay”, "deny”,
"denigrate/degrade”, and "deter.”

2.4	According to staff, the Iran team currently aims to achieve counter-proliferation
by: (1) discrediting the Iranian leadership and it’s nuclear programme; (2) delaying
and disrupting access to materials used in the nuclear programme; (3) conducting
online HUMINT; and (4) counter-censorship. The Serious Crime team currently aims
to reduce online organised crime by: (1) disrupting the activities of front companies;
and (2) discrediting the online presence of such companies and their owners as well
as promoting distrust among them and consumers. Two of the Global team’s current
aims are regime change in Zimbabwe by discrediting the present regime, and
preventing Argentina from taking over the Falkland Islands by conducting online
HUMINT. The CT group’s operations currently aim to counter Islamic radicalisation
and monitor Irish Republican dissident groups by: (1) disrupting the dissemination of
extremist material over the internet; (2) discrediting extremist sites and
individuals/groups; (3) conducting online HUMINT; and (4) hosting extremist sites (to
enable collection of SIGINT). The Cyber Coordination and Operations team currently
aims to investigate cybercrime and electronic attack by: (1) denying, deterring or
dissuading criminals, state actors and hacktivists; (2) providing intelligence for judicial
outcomes; and (3) discrediting cybercrime forums and their users. The team also
acts as a liaison and support for JTRIG teams in Bude and Scarborough. The
Network Defence team currently aims to safeguard critical computer networks
against cyberattack by: (1) discrediting cybercriminals and malware providers; (2)
disrupting State sponsored malware infrastructure; and (2) conducting online
HUMINT. Two of the Cyber Crime team’s current aims are to prevent and reduce

8	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

online credit card fraud and child exploitation by: (1) disrupting the dissemination of
child porn, malware and data gathered by it; (2) discrediting those selling stolen
credit card and ID details or child porn online and promoting distrust in them; (3)
deterring, disrupting or degrading online consumerism of stolen data or child porn;
and (4) increasing the reporting of online crime. The Cyber Crime team’s other
current aim is to monitor domestic extremist groups such as the English Defence
League by conducting online HUMINT. Finally, some of the SMO group’s current
aims are counter-insurgency including counter-improvised explosive device by: (1)
denying and disrupting the Taliban message; (2) strategic messaging; (3) delivering
tactical in-theatre effects supporting Special Forces; and (4) seized media
exploitation.

2.5	Operation methods/techniques. All of JTRIG’s operations are conducted using
cyber technology. Staff described a range of methods/techniques that have been
used to-date for conducting effects operations. These included:

•	Uploading YouTube videos containing "persuasive” communications (to
discredit, promote distrust, dissuade, deter, delay or disrupt)

•	Setting up Facebook groups, forums, blogs and Twitter accounts that
encourage and monitor discussion on a topic (to discredit, promote distrust,
dissuade, deter, delay or disrupt)

•	Establishing online aliases/personalities who support the communications or
messages in YouTube videos, Facebook groups, forums, blogs etc

•	Establishing online aliases/personalities who support other aliases

•	Sending spoof e-mails and text messages from a fake person or mimicking a
real person (to discredit, promote distrust, dissuade, deceive, deter, delay or
disrupt)

•	Providing spoof online resources such as magazines and books that provide
inaccurate information (to disrupt, delay, deceive, discredit, promote distrust,
dissuade, deter or denigrate/degrade)

•	Providing online access to uncensored material (to disrupt)

•	Sending instant messages to specific individuals giving them instructions for
accessing uncensored websites

•	Setting up spoof trade sites (or sellers) that may take a customer’s money
and/or send customers degraded or spoof products (to deny, disrupt,
degrade/denigrate, delay, deceive, discredit, dissuade or deter)

•	Interrupting (i.e., filtering, deleting, creating or modifying) communications
between real customers and traders (to deny, disrupt, delay, deceive,
dissuade or deter)

•	Taking over control of online websites (to deny, disrupt, discredit or delay)

•	Denial of telephone and computer service (to deny, delay or disrupt)

•	Hosting targets’ online communications/websites for collecting SIGINT (to
disrupt, delay, deter or deny)

•	Contacting host websites asking them to remove material (to deny, disrupt,
delay, dissuade or deter)

2.6	Some of JTRIG’s staff have conducted online HUMINT operations. Such
operations typically involve establishing an online alias/personality who has a
Facebook page, and membership of relevant web forums, etc. The target is then

9	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

befriended (or the target befriends the alias). Interactions with the target may be
informed by a combination of analysis of SIGINT provided by the IPTs, monitoring of
the target’s online behaviour, and intelligence from SIS “on-the-ground”. The goal
may be to collect intelligence and/or to facilitate SIS contact in order to disrupt, delay,
deceive, deter or dissuade.

JTRIG Staff Views of Operational Planning and Management

2.7	Risk assessment. For the most part, staff noted that risk assessments for
operations were conducted by the individual(s) planning and leading the operation.
Sometimes risk assessments were done by the agency that was tasking or
collaborating with them on an operation (e.g., Security Services).

2.8	A risk assessment typically referred to identification of the potential costs
(drawbacks) and/or an estimation of the likelihood of the costs occurring. Commonly
identified costs included:

•	Being discovered (i.e., as a GCHQ operation)

•	Loss of credibility or trust or confidence of target

•	Being blocked from the website, internet or telephone service

•	Incitement

•	Entrapment

•	Aiding and abetting (or providing cyber criminals new ideas)

•	Physical harm to the target (either from others or themselves)

•	Displacement so that target moves to other sites or regions

•	Target changes/adapts tactic (e.g., uses middle-men)

•	Threatening a target’s ego could lead to a counter effect

•	The influence communication may interact with an existing message to create
an unexpected adverse effect

•	Damaging international relations between the target country and the country to
which the online communication can be attributed

•	Interfering/confounding operations being conducted by other agencies (who
may sometimes represent other countries)

•	Wasted time due to failure to deconflict with another agency that is also
occupying the same cyberspace and/or conducting an (on- or off-line)
operation

•	Financial cost

2.9	Staff noted that the magnitude and likelihood of the risks (costs) may differ
according to the target of the operation. For example, the risk of being discovered
conducting operations against a regime are greater in some countries (e.g., China)
than others (e.g., Africa), and the risk is considerably less when the operation is
conducted against an individual or group than against a regime.

2.10	Staff also noted that some risks could be reduced. For example, the risk of
being discovered or for misattribution of the operation to a specific state, group or
individual could be reduced by creating a spoof alias/personality or group who overtly

10	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

takes responsibility for the "attack.” Staff in larger teams (e.g., CT) routinely shared
alias details in order to deconflict with one another.

2.11	Measures of effectiveness/success of operations. Overall, staff considered
that it was difficult to measure operational success, although it was easier for
operations with certain types of goals (e.g., deny or denigrate/degrade). They
described little routine, formal measurement of the effectiveness/success of the
operations that they had conducted. However, discussion led to the identification of
several potential variables that could be measured as well as the methods that could
be used to measure them. These included:

•	Count the number and/or location of views (e.g., for YouTube video) or hits to
a website to see if people have accessed the message

•	Check online and/or collect SIGINT to see if a message has been attended to,
understood, accepted, remembered, and changed behaviour (e.g., people
have spread the message and communicate support for it, people lack trust in
the discredited individual/group/regime, people are delayed or deterred from
an activity or interaction)

•	Count the number and significance of friends that an alias has, people who
have joined the Facebook group, people who have responded to a blog, or
customers who have viewed a trade site (or seller)

•	Count the amount of money that customers spend in spoof trade sites (or with
sellers)

•	Measure the amount of time that customers spend engaging with spoof trade
sites (or sellers)

•	Count the amount of money that is saved by removing stolen IDs from the
internet

•	Analyse the content of communication between a potential source of online
HUMINT and the alias to see if he/she is providing useful intelligence

•	Count the number of times a potential source of online HUMINT initiates
communication with the alias

•	Check if a potential source of online HUMINT does meet with the SIS as
intended

•	Check online and/or collect SIGINT to see if people have accessed
uncensored material that has been made available to them

•	Check online to see if hosts who have been asked to delete material have
done so

•	Count the number of websites taken down

•	Count the number of illegal material (e.g., child porn photos or stolen credit
cards removed from a website)

•	Check if an individual or group does allow their site to be hosted (unknowingly)
by JTRIG

•	Count the number of people arrested for a specific offence whom JTRIG has
identified

2.12	Most of the above measures of operational success are quantitative. Some
are only indirectly indicative of the operational aim being achieved. And, there was
little consideration of the durability of the effects. It is also clear that measurement of
operational success may require support from other areas of GCHQ (e.g., to obtain

11	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

SIGINT) as well as external agencies such as SIS (e.g., to assess the usefulness of
online HUMINT).

2.13	Staff suggested that the success of an operation may be threatened by factors
such as the:

•	Lack of continuity in maintaining an alias or communicating via an alias if a
staff member is away and his/her work is covered by others

•	Difficulty in maintaining more than a small number (e.g., 2 or 3) of unique,
multi-dimensional, active aliases, especially when doing online HUMINT

•	Difficulty of communicating in a fashion representative of the socio-cultural-
demographic category of an alias

•	Lack of photographs/visual images of online aliases

•	Lack of time and staff to maintain blogs and aliases, and search for extremist
material on the web etc

•	Lack of sufficient number and varied cultural language advisors e.g., Russian,
Arabic, Pashtu

•	Distractions from the JTRIG floor plate/office environment when
communicating with targets

•	Lack of co-ordination/understanding of the FCO or HMG’s changing policies,
(and with ISAF or MoD - a potential problem for the SMO team)

•	Suspicion aroused by the fact that staff cannot meet face-to-face with targets
who are geographically close

•	Suspicion aroused by the fact that staff cannot communicate on instant
messenger with those speaking a different language

2.14	Staff also noted that in some cases efforts had already been made to reduce
the threats to operational success. For instance, in order to increase continuity in
maintaining an alias or communicating via an alias when covering for a member of
staff who is away, records of past communications were taken (although these were
time consuming to read and did not clearly highlight the nonverbal aspects of the
online communication e.g., use of grammar). In one case, a staff member
"shadowed” another before he left in order to facilitate a smooth transition in taking
over an alias.

2.15	Finally, despite a lack of consistent and comprehensive approach to
measuring operational success, staff recognised the potential usefulness of
measuring the success of operations. For example, there is a need to understand if
successful operations generalise to different cultures (e.g., Western versus Eastern,
business versus customer, and opportunistic versus professional offenders).

Staff Development

2.16	Background and experience. The background and work experience of JTRIG
staff includes IT, computing, politics, languages, law, maths, chemistry, sociology,
journalism, publishing, police, and military/defence. Many of the staff have worked in
other areas of GCHQ before coming to JTRIG. Therefore, although staff have a

12	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

range of potentially useful and relevant experiences and varied backgrounds, there is
a gap in their formal knowledge of the human/behavioural sciences.

2.17	Staff said they had essentially trained themselves "on-the-job” or learned from
observing/shadowing more experienced staff, although some noted they had gone on
external training courses. In some cases, staff felt they were sometimes reliant on
others and lacked some confidence. Some staff were also concerned about the
morality and ethics of their operational work, particularly given the level of deception
involved.

2.18	Behavioural science needs. Staff identified various areas of behavioural
science support that their effects and online HUMINT operations might benefit from.
These mostly referred to social psychology, and included:

•	Psychology of relationships (including online social interactions)

•	Cultural impact on social interactions

•	Psychology of trust and distrust

•	Psychological profiling

•	Developing realistic online aliases/personalities

•	Psychology of persuasion

•	Mass messaging

•	Marketing/branding of YouTube videos

•	Plausible excuses for not being able to communicate or interact with target
online (or face-to-face)

•	Effective delay tactics and "hooks” when dealing with online customers

•	Online criminal behaviour (e.g., child exploitation, fraud)

•	Youth behaviour online

•	Online business operations

2.19	In addition, staff said they needed more information on the following:

•	Awareness of current affairs (relevant to a specific region or group) to ensure
the message is relevant (in time and place)

•	Relevant subject matter expertise

•	Awareness of legalities of operational work

•	Practice using social networking sites

•	Language training

Views of Others Supporting JTRIG

2.20	Interviewees from outside of JTRIG were asked to comment broadly on how
they support the JTRIG teams, and how behavioural science input could (if at all)
support their work.

2.21	IPTs. The IPTs are the operation managers and have target expertise and
domain knowledge. They decide on the most appropriate message that needs to be
communicated in order to influence. They provide SIGINT useful for understanding
the target such as his/her behaviours, relationships, interactions, and online

13	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

presence. Currently, IPTs rely on commonsense and cultural experience. IPTs would
find behavioural science useful to help them ascertain a target’s motivations in order
to plan effective operations.

2.22	Cultural linguists. JTRIG is reliant on GCHQ’s Central Language Team and
linguists in IPTs, but does have its own Arabic language capability (mainly in the CT
group). Linguists help to write and revise communications so they are linguistically
accessible and culturally appropriate; suggest online locations where messages can
be best posted; and maintain online aliases for blogging etc. Linguistic support,
however, does not overcome the fact that language barriers limit the use of instant
messaging when conducting online HUMINT. The fact that linguists (like others)
cannot see the target, leads them to try to "guess” how best to interact with the target
and how to interpret the target’s reactions. They familiarise themselves with the
websites and issues being discussed in order to inform their own online interactions
via blogs etc. Linguists would find behavioural science useful in knowing how to
attract an audience to their blogs and/or make online friends.

2.23	Legal advisors. The legal advisors ensure that operations comply with laws,
and this may result in operations being revised or blocked. The process involves: (1)
deciding whether the operation fulfils one of GCHQ’s statue functions, and whether it
is necessary and proportionate; (2) identifying if the operation complies with any
applicable Uk law, and if it doesn’t then obtaining authorisation from the Secretary of
State; and (3) identifying if the operation complies with any applicable international
law, and if it doesn’t considering whether non-compliance would be acceptable
among the 5-eyes community. However, it is difficult to apply the principles of
necessity and proportionality if operational plans are imprecise and partial. In
addition, whereas legal compliance is more straightforward, policy compliance is
difficult to ascertain, and consideration of ethical compliance is even more difficult.
JTRIG staff (especially those leading operations) are provided mandatory legality
training. Nevertheless, it might be useful for JTRIG staff to know more about these
issues.

2.24	OMGs. The OMGs provide governance and oversight of operations, and they
comprise relevant members of the IPT, JTRIG staff, policy, and legal advisors.
Currently, when requesting OMG approval for an operation, the operation lead is
expected to provide the following information: A brief description of the operation
(including aim and method); assessment of the risks involved (e.g., risks to
individuals, accessibility/visibility to a hostile SIGINT agency, attribution to the UK or
HMG, and risk to existing US/UK accesses); target; techniques to be used; legal
position and authorisation; policy constraints; and additional operational constraints.

It may also be useful to provide information on: The rationale for the operation (e.g.,
business case); the risks to ongoing operations/investigations and the need to
deconflict; how risks could be mitigated; the resources needed for the operation (e.g.,
human, financial, practical/technical, other agencies); and a prediction of the
outcomes of the operation. All of the above information could be elicited using a
"why, what, when, where, how (and why)” approach. This may make the OMG
process more consistent and transparent, and increase the likelihood that all of the
information needed by external partners is available. The OMG considers if an
operation complies with legal, political and practical concerns. However, concepts

14	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

such as "proportionality” and "necessity” are undefined and open to subjective
interpretation. OMGs may also find it difficult to assess the operation if its goals are
unclear. Currently, there are no specific guidelines on ethical practice. Risk is
calculated in terms of likelihood and impact of costs, and refers mostly to technical,
operational and legal/policy factors. The approach to risk assessment is based on
qualitative discussion rather than quantitative scientific/statistical methods. Although
JTRIG does some Battle Damage Assessment (BDA) after an operation, precise
measures of success would be useful for OMGs considering whether resource and
cost intensive operations should proceed. More information on operational success
might also reduce any risk aversion among OMGs (especially for more ethically
complex operations).

15	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

3.	Behavioural Science Support

3.1	Given the goals and (individual/group) targets of JTRIG’s operations, there are
various ways in which knowledge gleaned from the behavioural sciences can be
used to inform the methods/techniques that JTRIG currently uses for it’s effects and
online HUMINT operations as well as help JTRIG to develop new ones. Specifically,
JTRIG’s operations can benefit from psychologically grounded influence techniques
and psycho-criminological approaches to influencing prevention. This chapter
provides a brief description of some of these techniques and approaches (it is
necessarily illustrative rather than exhaustive; see also Annex A).

Psychology-Based Influence Techniques

3.2	Theories and research in the field of social psychology may prove particularly
useful for informing JTRIG’s effects and online HUMINT operations. The following
topics would be particularly relevant for social influence:

•	Social cognition (including social perception and attribution)

•	Attitudes

•	Persuasive communications

•	Conformity

•	Obedience

•	Interpersonal relationships

•	Trust and distrust

•	Psychological profiling

In addition, the application of social psychological ideas to marketing and advertising
would be useful. A brief synopsis of the most relevant aspects of each of these topics
is provided below (see also Bachmann & Zaheer, 2008; Cialdini, 2009; Fiske, 2010;
Fiske, Gilbert, & Lindzey, 2010; Forgas, Copper, & Crano, 2010; Hogg & Vaughan,
2008; Horowitz & Strack, 2010; Maio & Haddock, 2009).

3.3	Social cognition refers to how we perceive aspects of our social world,
including other people, ourselves and social situations. Impression management or
self-presentation can be used to influence how others perceive us. This can be
achieved via several different techniques including: Matching others’ behaviour;
conforming to situational norms; ingratiation; consistency of self; self-promotion;
credible intimidation; exemplary behaviour; and supplication (i.e., needing help). The
ability to see how others view us and to self-monitor so we can adapt our self-
presentation to the situation, are important skills to possess for effective impression
management.

3.4	Attitudes reflect a combination of beliefs and values that partly affect how we
think, feel and behave. People may change their attitudes in order to achieve a sense
of internal consistency - in fact, they may selectively attend to and interpret
information that increases such dissonance, especially when it arises out of a

16	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

voluntary decision or action (and if this was attributed to an internal rather than
external state). When specific attitudes are important to an individual, attitude change
may only occur after systematic processing of the content of a persuasive
communication. By contrast, when an attitude is not personally involving then attitude
change may occur through heuristic processing of the content of the communication,
and people may be persuaded by peripheral or even non-relevant information.
Attitude formation or change based on heuristic processing may be more unreliable
and so less predictive of behaviour and also easier to alter. Attitude change may be
induced by fear or vulnerability to threat. However, high levels of fear may inhibit
change if people lack confidence or knowledge of how to reduce the threat to them.
Attitudes (especially prejudicial ones) that have an ego-defence function can be more
resistant to change. Prejudicial attitudes may be reduced by increasing contact with
the person or object against which the prejudice is directed (Pettigrew & Tropp,

2006). Crucially, this contact should be of equal status and in a cooperative context,
frequent, not anxiety or threat inducing, and encouraging positive cross-group
relations.

3.5	Persuasive communications should focus on the communicator, message,
recipient, and the situation. Effective communication campaigns should ask the
following: What is the credibility, status, attractiveness, and trustworthiness of the
source? Is the message explicit or implicit, emotional or informational, one- or two-
sided, and in what order is it presented relative to other information (i.e., first or last)?
What is the education level of the recipient, what functions does the attitude have,
how resistant is that person to persuasion, and willing to accept or reject the
message? Finally, is the situation formal or informal? Messages that are specific are
more likely to be effective. In order to persuade, the recipient needs to have access
to the message, to have attended to it, understood it, and accepted it, remembered it,
and behaved according to it. Propaganda techniques include: Using stereotypes;
substituting names/labels for neutral ones; censorship or systematic selection of
information; repetition; assertions without arguments; and presenting a message for
and against a subject.

3.6	Obedience is a direct form of social influence where an individual submits to,
or complies with, an authority figure. Obedience may be explained by factors such as
diffusion of responsibility, perception of the authority figure being legitimate, and
socialisation (including social role). Compliance can be achieved through various
techniques including: Engaging the norm of reciprocity; engendering liking (e.g., via
ingratiation or attractiveness); stressing the importance of social validation (e.g., via
highlighting that others have also complied); instilling a sense of scarcity or secrecy;
getting the “foot-in-the-door” (i.e., getting compliance to a small request/issue first);
and applying the “door-in-the-face” or “low-ball” tactics (i.e., asking for compliance on
a large request/issue first and having hidden aspects to a request/issue that
someone has already complied with, respectively). Conversely, efforts to reduce
obedience may be effectively based around educating people about the adverse
consequences of compliance; encouraging them to question authority; and exposing
them to examples of disobedience.

3.7	Conformity is an indirect form of social influence whereby an individual’s
beliefs, feelings and behaviours yield to those (norms) of a social group to which the

17	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

individual belongs or to a reference group. Conformity may reflect a person being
converted (internalising) or simply being publically compliant. Conformity may be
explained by the need to have an accurate representation of the world (via social
comparison) and to be accepted by others (by adhering to a norm). Typically,
minorities may conform to majorities. However, minority groups can influence the
majority by showing a sense of consistency; demonstrated investment;
independence; balanced judgment; and similarity to the majority in terms of age,
gender and social category.

3.8	The psychology of interpersonal relationships focuses on how relationships
begin, are maintained and disintegrate. People are more likely to seek affiliation
(others’ company) when feeling anxious, having experienced a relationship
breakdown, or in a new environmental setting. Here, people seek those who have
had similar experiences as them (for, e.g., social comparison and information
purposes). Indeed, similarity of sociological, demographic and psychological
variables is important in enduring relationships. Interpersonal relationships may begin
through the reward value of factors such as proximity; exposure; familiarity; similarity;
and physical attractiveness. Reciprocal self-disclosure is an important step in the
process of developing a relationship. As social exchanges, reciprocal relationships
are rewarding. However, relationships in western and non-western cultures differ in
terms of, for example, their individualistic-collectivist, voluntary-involuntary, and
temporary-permanent nature. Self-disclosure can be increased via reciprocity,
situational norms, trust, and the intimacy of a relationship. Women are likely to
disclose more than men.

3.9	Trust is characterised as involving levels of hope, faith, confidence, passivity
and hesitance (Lewicki, McAllister, & Bies, 1998; see also Adams & Sartori, 2005).
Distrust is a separate, but related construct, which can be characterised as involving
levels of fear, scepticism, cynicism, monitoring and vigilance. In addition, distrust
involves a perception of malevolent intentionality. Events may arouse distrust or
simply reduce trust. The former will be affected by the type of violation, its centrality
and the attribution it invokes. Distrust can be affected by factors such as the
distruster’s propensity to distrust, his/her goals, and judgment biases/errors (e.g.,
attribution error); perceptions of the distrustee’s values, attitudes and intentions, as
well as reputation and group membership; group or organisational context, structure
and norms. Both trust and distrust are affected by the level of risk, vulnerability and
uncertainty in an environment or situation. Both constructs lead to varying levels of
conflict, monitoring, cooperation, enacting of control strategies, and interpersonal
distress (although these consequences are more intense under distrust and
obviously differ in directionality). In addition, distrust may lead to biased information
processing, self-focus, hyper-vigilance, and rumination, as well as motivation for
revenge.

3.10	Psychological profiling can help to identify an individual’s personal
characteristics (e.g., cognitive processes, behaviours and habits) useful for shaping
and predicting his/her behaviour (Mann, 2008). For instance, DI HF produces profiles
(called psychological assessments) of targets, and the police use criminal profiling.
Constructing a profile involves collecting and analysing data about the individual.

Data may be collected from open sources and/or intelligence. Analysis may be

18	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

‘clinical’ (i.e., based on the profiler’s intuition, experience and knowledge) or
‘statistical’ (i.e., based on comparison with characteristics of others who fit the data
pattern). However, there is little evidence to suggest that profiling leads to accurate
predictions (Snook, Eastwood, Gendreau, Goggin, & Cullen, 2007). In addition,
although knowledge of an individual’s personality may increase our ability to predict
his/her behaviour, behaviour may be affected by time and situation, and so an
interactionist approach may prove more useful (Mischel, 1973).

3.11	Social psychological knowledge has been applied to advertising and
marketing (Clow & Baack, 2007; Kahle & Kim, 2006). Marketing approaches help to
identify the target audience, as well as predict and meet their needs. Different types
of advertising can increase people’s awareness and knowledge of an item/issue,
their liking, preference and support for it, and encourage behavioural acquisition of it.
Knowledge of concepts such as branding, product placement, sales promotions,
niche marketing, crowd sourcing, herd behaviour, market segmentation, public
relations, and viral advertising/marketing may be particularly relevant for JTRIG’s
effects and online HUMINT operations. In addition internet/digital/online/web or e-
marketing and advertising can indicate how these concepts and approaches are
applied in cyberspace.

3.12	Of particular relevance to the cyber-based effects and online HUMINT
operations conducted by JTRIG is that researches have begun to study behaviour in
cyberspace, including social influence. For instance, studies have found that
anonymous groups may be more susceptible to influence than identifiable groups
(Postmes, Spears, Sakhel, & de Groot, 2001). People in online social networks make
new links with those whom they perceive to be similar (Crandall et al., 2008), and
they are more likely to view a YouTube video if they believe others similar to them
have viewed and liked it (Marcus & Perez, 2007). Neighbours/friends in online social
networks are also more powerful than strangers in persuading a user to join an online
group (Hui & Buchegger, 2009). The ability to trigger replies from others, create
conversations between others, and induce similarity of language among users is
more likely to be found in "online leaders” who demonstrate high communication
activity, longer group membership, expansive and reciprocal social networks, and
language use characterised by talkativeness, diversity, assertiveness, and emotion
(Huffaker, 2010). High numbers of chat room contributions and words, as well as
high levels of assertiveness and exaggeration can have a significant influencing
effect during anonymous computer-mediated discourse (Miller & Brunner, 2008).
Finally, during computer-mediated interaction, females are more likely to conform
when the other party expresses confidence in their expertise verbally, whereas males
are more likely to be influenced by quantitative expressions of confidence (Lee,

2005). Male online characters are also more likely to induce informational influence
than female ones.

3.13	One important caveat to the psychological work on the above topics is that it
has for the most part been based on limited samples of the human population (e.g.,
White, middle-class, American, male, students). This lack of representativeness
means that the theories and research findings may not be generalisable to other
populations (e.g., other ethnicities, less educated, females, older adults, other
cultures). For instance, attribution processes differ in collectivist and individualistic

19	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

cultures in that collectivist (mainly non-Western) cultures are more likely to attribute a
person’s behaviour to situational rather than dispositional/personality causes, and so
dissonance is less in collectivist cultures (e.g., Nagayama Hall & Barongan, 2002).
Collectivist cultures also demonstrate a greater tendency for conformity, and levels of
obedience vary across social contexts (Smith & Bond, 1998). Therefore, when
planning effects and online HUMINT operations, JTRIG staff should avoid
ethnocentrism, and understand the psycho-social processes common to the culture
they wish to engage with.

Psycho-Criminological Approaches to Influencing Prevention

3.14	The overall goal of JTRIG’s effects and online HUMINT operations is to
combat external threats at source. These threats may be actual or potential, and they
may be eliminated or reduced. The specific objectives of the operations are not
unlike some of those strived for by the formal criminal justice system such as
prevention, deterrence and incapacitation. For example, posing as a vendor trading
in uranium and taking payment from an individual or group who wishes to purchase
products necessary for building a nuclear weapon would financially incapacitate them
from purchasing such products from an actual vendor. Beyond the delay effects due
to incapacitation, it may also deter them or others from engaging in this type of
business transaction in the future. However, incapacitation is typically temporary, and
there is little evidence for the deterrence effects of incapacitation (e.g., von Hirsch,
Bottoms, Burney, Wikstrom & 1999; Gendreau & Goggin, 1999). Alternatively,
prevention may be a more effective means of dealing with threats. Thus, JTRlG’s
operations may benefit from being informed by the theoretical and empirical work on
crime prevention.

3.15	Of particular relevance to the targets that JTRIG typically focuses on, a
situational crime prevention approach has been proposed for dealing with terrorism
(see Freilich & Newman, 2009). This includes terrorist hostage taking in Afghanistan
(Yun, 2009) and far-right activists (Freilich & Chermak, 2009). It is also suggested
that intelligence work should focus on gathering information relevant for prevention of
terrorism (Newman, 2009). The roots of situational crime prevention approaches in
conceptions of the offender’s decision making are briefly described below.

3.16	Rational choice theories of offender behaviour posit that individuals attach
values to the possible rewards and costs associated with an action, calculate the
probabilities of these rewards and costs, weight the values of reward and costs by
their respective probabilities, and choose the course of action that maximises gains
and minimizes losses (see Becker, 1968). There is some (mostly qualitative)
evidence to support this approach (e.g., Carroll & Weaver, 1986), and it has practical
implications for crime prevention. In fact, the Home Office’s situational crime
prevention agenda is rooted in the rational choice approach. It is suggested that
"crime can be prevented by reducing opportunities” (Felson & Clarke, 1998, p. vi).
Prevention techniques may focus on: (1) increasing the perceived effort involved in
committing crime; (2) increasing the perceived risks; (3) reducing the anticipated
rewards; and (4) removing excuses for crime. The perceived effort can be increased

20	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

by, for example, target hardening, controlling access to targets, and deflecting
offenders from targets (see Clarke, 1997). The perceived risk of crime can be
increased by surveillance. The anticipated rewards of crime can be reduced by, for
example, removing targets, reducing temptation, and denying benefits. Finally,
excuses for crime can be reduced by, for example, alerting conscience, controlling
disinhibitors, and assisting compliance. (Note, that in this literature "target” refers to
person or property that may be victimized, which is not to be confused with JTRIG’s
use of the term to represent the individuals or groups who are the subject of
operations).

3.17	By contrast to the above rational choice approach, there are also views of
offenders’ rationality that emphasize its bounded or limited nature (e.g., Johnson &
Payne, 1986; Tunnell, 2002). Rationality may be limited by, for example, limited time,
information, resources, and cognitive processing capacity, as well as
psychopharmacological agents. Recent evidence suggests that (actual and potential)
offenders’ intentions to engage in criminal activity are best predicted by their
perceptions of the importance they attach to the benefits, regardless of their
probabilities or the drawbacks and their probabilities (Dhami & Mandel, in press). In
fact, individuals may be well aware of the potential drawbacks involved in a risky
behaviour, but they also see potential benefits (Dhami, Mandel, & Garcia-Retamero,
2010). Other evidence also indicates that offenders’ decisions to commit crimes are
better predicted by simple heuristic processing where the vast majority of pertinent
information is ignored, than by more complex processing that weights and integrates
the available, relevant information (Garcia-Retamero & Dhami, 2009; Snook, Dhami,
& Kavanagh, 2010). The practical implications of this bounded rationality approach
are clear: Prevention efforts ought to identify and alter people’s perceptions of the
benefits of engaging in a risky (criminal) behaviour. Where possible, efforts could
also be made to highlight acceptable alternatives to these behaviours that yield the
desired benefits. Finally, prevention efforts could further emphasise the low
probabilities of obtaining the benefits, the undesirability of the drawbacks, and the
higher probabilities of incurring them.

3.18	More recently, a distinction has been made between "hard” and "soft”
situational crime prevention techniques (Wortley, 2001,2008). Unlike the former that
manipulate situational factors, the latter manipulate psycho-emotional factors.
Ideologically motivated crimes and those committed by non-violent, "mundane”
offenders may be particularly suitable for soft measures. In fact, unlike hard
techniques that may be easily detected, and so be provocative or countered, soft
techniques are subtle, and also less susceptible to displacement. Some examples of
soft techniques include: Reducing frustration and stress; avoiding disputes; posting
instructions; neutralizing peer pressure; discouraging imitation; alerting conscience;
and assisting compliance.

3.19	One important point to stress when combating threats and using crime
prevention techniques is to understand their nature in detail and to identify the factors
that may motivate and deter relevant individuals or groups. This can help to best
tailor the technique to the individual target(s), and increase operational success.

21	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

3.20	Displacement represents one of the main risks of crime prevention techniques.
Displacement may be geographical, temporal, target, tactical, or offence type.
However, displacement is rarely 100%, and can sometimes be controlled (see
Clarke, 1997). In fact, there may sometimes be a diffusion of benefits to other
locations and victims.

22	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

4.	Non-Technical Operational Planning and Management

4.1	In order for JTRIG to plan and conduct successful effects and online HUMINT
operations there is a need to ensure best practice in terms of, for example, risk
assessment, measurement of operational success, and staff conduct. This chapter
provides guidance on how such best practice can be achieved.

Risk Assessment

4.2	JTRIG staff identified several potential risks associated with conducting effects
and online HUMINT operations (see Chapter 2, para. 2.8 and 2.13). Assessing the
potential risks involved in conducting an operation and how they can be avoided or
mitigated is essential not only to the planning of an operation, but also to informing
decisions about whether it should proceed and measuring its success. Below is a
discussion of some of the main issues that ought to be considered in developing a
comprehensive risk assessment process.

4.3	Risk assessments (including within JTRIG) commonly focus solely on the
value of the costs and/or their probability of occurrence. This is only a partial
assessment as it excludes the potential benefits and their probabilities. Thus,
following Knight’s (1921) comprehensive definition of risk, in order to compute the
(subjective) expected utility of conducting an operation (see Savage, 1954), it is
advisable to identify and calculate the magnitude of the benefits and multiply these
by their probabilities, and then subtract the magnitude of the costs multiplied by their
probabilities. The magnitude of the costs and benefits may be quantitatively and/or
qualitatively defined (e.g., financial cost of operation and amount of extremist
material taken off a website are quantitative costs and benefits, respectively;
whereas being discovered and influencing distrust in a trader are qualitative costs
and benefits). Similarly, probabilities may be defined in numerical or linguistic terms
(e.g., 30% chance; very likely). Measures of variables may be objective and/or
subjective. Both objective and subjective measures are susceptible to measurement
error, however. Where objective measurements of the costs and benefits associated
with an operation are difficult to come by, as is likely to be the case for JTRIG’s
operations, subjective ones may be acceptable. Here, estimates can be obtained
from subject matter experts if they are available (SMEs; see e.g., Slottje, Sluijs, &
Knol, 2008).

4.4	Some scholars have argued that in addition to computing the potential risk
involved in engaging in a specific action, the potential risk involved in inaction should
also be computed (Furby & Beyth-Marom, 1992). This more time and resource
intensive approach has not been particularly popular, but it does allow for a more
comprehensive assessment, and one that estimates the potential outcome in the
absence of an operation.

23	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

4.5	A risk assessment should also involve identification of ways in which any
unacceptable risks can be avoided or mitigated, and consideration of how successful
such interventions might be.

4.6	Finally, the way in which the output of a risk assessment is interpreted is also
important. For instance, there needs to be consistency in interpretation of the
probabilities, particularly if they are expressed linguistically. Although interpretations
of linguistic probabilities that may be used to communicate the probabilities
associated with the costs and benefits of an operation are subject to both intra- and
inter-individual unreliability, these can be reduced by a simple translation method
(see Dhami & Wallsten, 2005). In addition, in the public health domain, the use of
specific interventions is not allowed unless it can be demonstrated that they do not
increase the risk to the sample or population of interest beyond an acceptable and
agreed threshold (Fischoff, Lichtenstein, Slovic, Derby, & Keeney, 1981). It might be
useful to develop a set of relevant thresholds for JTRIG’s operations that set out the
acceptable risk. This can be done using revealed- and expressed-preference
methods (see e.g., McDaniels, 1988; Slovic, 1995).

Measurement of Operational Success

4.7	JTRIG staff identified several potential measures of operational success (see
Chapter 2, para. 2.11). Measuring the effectiveness or success of an effects or online
HUMINT operation is essential not only because it provides useful feedback to those
who tasked and conducted the operation, but also because this information can be
used to inform the development and implementation of future operations. Success
measures also require clear specification of the goals and objectives of an operation.
Below is a discussion of some of the main issues that ought to be considered in
developing a comprehensive catalogue of operational success (or failure) measures.

4.8	Measures of operational success should be directly or indirectly related to the
specific aims of the operation (e.g., to "discredit”, promote "distrust,” "dissuade”,
"deceive”, "disrupt”, "delay”, "deny”, "denigrate/degrade”, and "deter”).

4.9	When conducting operations whose main goal is to influence by changing
attitudes, encouraging compliance, obedience or conformity, and persuade measures
need to be taken in order to ascertain the following:

•	Has the target attended to the message?

•	Has the target understood the message?

•	Has the target accepted the message?

•	Has the target remembered the message?

•	Has the target behaved in accordance with the message?

4.10	When conducting online HUMINT operations, measures need to be taken in
order to ascertain the following:

•	Stage of relationship with the target

•	Closeness of relationship with the target

24	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

•	Level of trust and distrust the target has in the alias

•	Reliability and validity of intelligence provided by the target

•	Amount of valid and reliable intelligence provided by the target

•	Has the target provided sufficient information to conduct a psychological
profile?

4.11	Measures of operational success also ought to consider the potential risks and
benefits that have been identified in the risk assessment. Particular attention should
be paid to the duration of the outcomes, displacement (i.e., geographical, temporal,
target, tactical, or offence type), and diffusion of benefits to other locations and
victims.

4.12	A distinction should also be made between direct and indirect measures of
operational success, as well as objective and subjective measures. Greater weight
should be given to direct and objective measures. Effort should also be made to have
a combination of both quantitative and (intangible) qualitative measures, where
appropriate.

Conduct Guidelines

4.13	Practitioners of all sorts, including the police and behavioural scientists,
working with people, typically have to abide by a set of practice guidelines or codes
of conduct that not only enshrine best practice, but also potentially guard
practitioners from complaints and liability. Here, is a review of some of the main
components of existing codes and guidelines that may be pertinent to JTRIG’s
operations.

4.14	Police powers and how those powers can be exercised are contained in the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE; Home Office, 2011). Codes A and B
of PACE deal with powers to stop, search and seize. Code C sets out the
requirements for detention, treatment and questioning, and Code G sets out powers
of arrest (Code H refers to terror suspects). Code D deals with the methods of
identification and record keeping, while Codes E and F deal with recording interview
data. The Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (SOCA; Home Office, 2005)
similarly lays out, among other things, the powers of SOCA staff (including search
and investigation); use and disclosure of information; treatment of offenders assisting
in investigations and prosecutions; protection of witnesses and other persons
(including activities of certain organisations); proceeds of crime; international
obligations; and organisational liability for unlawful conduct. (See also the Criminal
Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 code of conduct; Home Office, 1996).

4.15	According to the British Society of Criminology’s (2011) code of ethics,
researchers should ensure that the physical, social and psychological wellbeing of
participants is not adversely affected by participation; seek participants’ informed
consent; protect the identity of participants and secure their data; and maintain good
relations with funding bodies. Similarly, the British Psychological Society (2004,

25	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

2007, 2009) lays out the ethical principles of respect, competence, responsibility, and
integrity. These embody standards of practice relating to, for example, privacy and
confidentiality; informed consent; conflicts of interest; maintaining personal
boundaries; safeguards for vulnerable populations; and appropriate supervision.
Ethical issues pertaining to internet research have also been outlined and include for
example, verifying identity, monitoring the consequences of research, and
understanding public versus private space. Typically, ethical approval must be
sought before research is conducted.

4.16	Clearly, not all of the aspects of the above codes will be relevant or applicable
to JTRIG’s operations. In addition, these codes do not identify best practice in all of
the types of online interactions that JTRIG staff might be involved in. Thus, JTRIG
may need to develop a bespoke code that in addition to other considerations
complies with legislation such as the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000
(Home Office, 2000) that regulates how public bodies conduct surveillance and
investigations, as well as intercept communications, and the Interception of
Communications Act 1985 (Home Office, 1985). Staff will need to recognise the
importance of compliance with any such code, and be aware of the potential
organisational responses to non-compliance.

26	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

5.	Conclusions and Recommendations

5.1	The importance of influence in cyberspace was highlighted in the recent
National Security Strategy (NSS) and the Strategic Defence and Security Review
(SDSR; UK Government, 2010a, 2010b). The SDSR states that "Strategic
communications are important for our national security because they can positively
change behaviours and attitudes to the benefit of the UK, and counteract the
influence of dangerous individuals, groups and states. The NSS recognises that
threats to the UK may involve the internet. Thus, one of the two objectives of the
NSS is to apply "...all our instruments of power and influence to shape the global
environment and tackle potential risks at source.” (p. 22). In addition, the SDSR
notes the FCO’s goal to "influence more audiences.” (p. 67).

5.2	JTRIG provides most of GCHQ’s cyber effects and online HUMINT capability.
Together, the Rest of the World, CT, and SMO groups target a range of individual,
group and state actors across the globe who pose criminal, security and defence
threats. JTRIG staff use a range of techniques to, for example, discredit, disrupt,
delay, deny, degrade, and deter. The techniques include: uploading YouTube videos
containing persuasive messages; establishing online aliases with Facebook and
Twitter accounts, blogs and forum memberships for conducting HUMINT or
encouraging discussion on specific issues; sending spoof emails and text messages
as well as providing spoof online resources; and setting up spoof trade sites. JTRIG
thus currently lies at the leading edge of cyber influence practice and expertise.

5.3	Based on interviewees with a sample of 22 JTRIG staff and seven other staff
from GCHQ who support JTRIG’s operations, the present report concludes that
JTRIG’s effects and online HUMINT capability can be further enhanced by
behavioural science support and improvement of some of JTRIG’s non-technical
operational planning and management. This chapter provides recommendations on
how to implement such support and improvement.

Recommendations for Behavioural Science Support

5.4	As Chapter 3 outlines, JTRIG’s effects and online HUMINT operations can be
grounded in scientific theory and evidence from social psychology (i.e., social
cognition, attitudes, persuasive communications, conformity, obedience,
interpersonal relationships, trust and distrust, and psychological profiling), including
its applications to advertising and marketing, and from criminology (i.e., crime
prevention).

5.5	To some extent, some JTRIG staff already employ some of the techniques
mentioned, and so these could be labelled as such. For instance, impression
management/self-presentation can be used to influence by mimicking or imitating
others’ behaviour. This technique is evident in the mimicking of popular or relevant
YouTube videos, Facebook profiles, censored news sites, and language used in

27	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

online business transactions. Reciprocity can be used to achieve compliance. This
technique is demonstrated by providing useful information to extremists, hackers,
and online criminals. However, there remains ample opportunity to expand JTRIG’s
techniques.

5.6	Recommendation 1. Chapter 3 describes behavioural techniques that can be
used to influence. It is recommended that JTRIG trains its’ staff to understand and
appropriately apply such techniques, which are listed in Annex A (see also Chapter
3). Annex B provides a list of reading material that may be useful for training.

5.7	Recommendation 2. Chapter 3 cautions that the past social psychological
research on influence has typically been limited to western cultures (and individuals)
and face-to-face interactions. It is recommended that Dstl develops a research
programme that: (1) measures the generalisability of specific social influence
techniques across cultural groups representative of the types of targets of interest to
defence and security organisations such as non-western cultures, business and
consumer cultures, and opportunistic/individual versus professional/organised
offenders, so that techniques can be applied appropriately. And (2) reviews the body
of work on influence in cyberspace in order to inform cyber influence operations.

5.8	Recommendation 3. Chapter 3 notes the widespread use of personality
profiling in the criminal justice system. It is recommended that Dstl develops a
programme of work that assesses the feasibility of compiling personality profiles
based on information available about the individual on the internet (and perhaps
through covert surveillance and/or developing online relations for HUMiNt
purposes), so that those conducting online HUMINT can compile and exploit such
profiles.

5.9	Recommendation 4. Chapter 3 also discusses the popularity of crime
prevention techniques. It is recommended that Dstl (1) reviews the extant literature
identifying the cost-benefit factors that motivate individuals to commit specific types
of criminal activity (especially online). And, (2) develops a catalogue of soft crime
prevention techniques and those that focus on perceived importance/value of
benefits to the target that can be applied online.

Recommendations for Improving Operational Planning and Management

5.10	As Chapter 4 outlines, the effectiveness of JTRIG’s effects and online
HUMINT operations can be enhanced by improving the current process of assessing
the risks associated with conducting operations and the measurement of operational
success, and by providing staff with practice/conduct guidelines.

5.11	Recommendation 5. Chapter 2 identifies operational risks and Chapter 4
describes a comprehensive approach to risk assessment. It is recommended that
JTRIG designs an operational risk assessment process focusing on the magnitude
and probability of both the costs and benefits of conducting and (perhaps not
conducting) an operation. Objective and/or subjective, quantitative and/or qualitative

28	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

measures of the outcomes should be identified so they can be applied consistently.
Potential general risk mitigation strategies and acceptable risk thresholds should also
be identified where possible. Finally, efforts should be made to provide a scale that
can be used to consistently interpret the output of risk assessments.

5.12	Recommendation 6. Several measures of operational success are listed in
Chapters 2 and 4. It is recommended that JTRIG develops a catalogue of
quantitative and qualitative, direct and indirect measures that provide reliable and
valid data on the effectiveness of online effects and HUMINT operations.

5.13	Recommendation 7. Chapter 4 discusses the applicability of practice
guidelines/conduct codes for JTRIG’s staff. It is recommended that JTRIG develops
relevant guidelines or a code describing best practice when conducting operations.

5.14	Annex C presents a list of training requirements for JTRIG staff that
incorporates the issues discussed in the present report (including recommendations
1 and 5 to 7). In addition to this, JTRIG may want to consider whether staff
recruitment could target social scientists. The advantages and limitations of having
staff specialising in specific techniques versus being generalists may also need to be
considered.

Final Remarks

5.15	Recommendations 1 and 5 to 7 refer to delivery of support and improvement
in the short-term that can have immediate and durable benefits for JTRIG’s
operational work. For the most part, these recommendations can be implemented by
JTRIG itself, with some assistance from OMG’s and legal advisors, and possibly
those experienced in teaching professional groups applied psychology/criminology.
Although the Defence Academy at Shrivenham has a course on information
operations, it is unclear if it covers influence in cyberspace, targets relevant to
JTRIG’s operations, and influence to achieve the typical aims of JTRIG’s operations.
Given that JTRIG has an in-house training capability, a bespoke training module
might not only be more effective, but also more convenient for staff and easy to
monitor/revise as JTRIG develops.

5.16	Recommendations 2 to 4 refer to delivery of support in the medium- to long-
term that can have durable benefits for those conducting cyber influence operations.
The implementation of these recommendations can be managed by Dstl. In doing so,
Dstl may wish to refer to relevant expertise across Defence and Government such as
the Behavioural Sciences Unit (BSU), as well as industry and academia. The BSU
has established links with JTRIG. Although there has been a debate recently as to
whether academics should be involved in military social influence campaigns (see
King, 2011), Dhami (2011) highlights the unique expertise that such psychological
scholars have in terms of interpreting the practical applicability of existing theories of
social influence as well as making theoretical advances useful for developing
practically relevant non-social influence techniques.

29	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

5.17	Targets can and will adapt to changes, and it is wise to think ahead and
laterally in order to anticipate adaptation levels in order to combat these. In order for
JTRIG to remain at the leading edge of cyber-based effects and online HUMINT
operations, it will need to consider the potential practical utility of emerging social and
non-social psychological and criminological theories for effecting influence against
threats in cyberspace.

30	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

References

TOP SECRET

Adams, B. D., & Sartori, J. A. (2005). The dimensionality of trust. DRDC Toronto No.
CR-2005-204.

Bachmann, R., & Zaheer, A. (2006). (Eds.), Handbook of trust research. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar Publishing.

Becker, G. (1968). Crime and punishment: An economic approach. Journal of
Political Economy,76, 169-217.

British Psychological Society (2009). Code of ethics and conduct. Retrieved from
http://www.bps.org.uk/document-download-area/document-download$.cfm?
file uuid=E6917759-9799-434A-F313-9C35698E1864&ext=pdf

British Psychological Society (2007). Conducting research on the internet: Guidelines
for ethical practice in psychological research online. Retrieved from
http://www.bps.org.uk/document-download-area/document-download$.cfm?
file uuid=2B3429B3-1143-DFD0-7E5A-4BE3FDD763CC&ext=pdf

British Psychological Society (2004). Guidelines for minimum standards of ethical
approval in psychological research. Leicester: British Psychological Society.

British Society of Criminology (2011). Code of ethics. Retrieved from
http://www.britsoccrim.org/codeofethics.htm

Carroll, J., & Weaver, F. (1986). Shoplifters’ perceptions of crime opportunities: A
process-tracing study. In D. B. Cornish, & R. V. Clarke (Eds.), The reasoning criminal
(pp. 19-38). New York: Springer-Verlag.

Cialdini, R. B. (2009). Influence: Science and practice. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Clarke, R. V. (1997). Situational crime prevention: Successful case studies. Second
Edition. Albany, NY: Harrow & Heston.

Clow, K. E., & Baack, D. (2007). Integrated advertising, promotion, and marketing
communications. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.

Crandall, D., Cosley, D., Huttenlocher, D., Kleinberg, J., & Suri, S. (2008). Feedback
effects between similarity and social influence in online communities. KDD.

Dhami, M. K. (2011). Military social influence: Commentary on King. Analyses of
Social Issues and Public Policy, 11.

Dhami, M. K., & Mandel, D. R. (in press). Crime as risk taking. Psychology, Crime
and Law.

31	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

Dhami, M. K., Mandel, D. R., & Garcia-Retamero, R. (2010). Canadian and Spanish
youths’ risk perceptions of drinking and driving, and riding with a drunk driver.
International Journal of Psychology.

Dhami, M. K., & Wallsten, T. S. (2005). Interpersonal comparison of subjective
probabilities. Memory & Cognition, 33, 1057-1068.

Felson, M., & Clarke, R. V., (1998). Opportunity makes the thief. Practical theory for
crime prevention. Police Research Series Paper 98. London: Home Office.

Fischoff, B., Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, P., Derby, S. K., & Keeney, R. (1981).
Acceptable risk. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Fiske, S. T. (2010). Social beings: Core motives in psychology. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons.

Fiske, S. T., Gilbert, D. T., & Lindzey, G. (2010). (Eds.), Handbook of social
psychology. New York: Wiley.

Forgas, J. P., Cooper, J., & Crano, W. D. (2010). (Eds.), The psychology of attitudes
and attitude change. London: Psychology Press.

Freilich, J. D., & Chermak, S. M. (2009). Preventing deadly encounters between law
enforcement and American far-rightists. Crime Prevention Studies, 25, 141-172.

Freilich, J. D., & Newman, G. R. (2009). (Eds.), Reducing terrorism through
situational crime prevention. Crime Prevention Studies, 25. Cullompton: Willan
Publishing.

Furby, L., & Beyth-Marom, R. (1992). Risk taking in adolescence: A decision-making
perspective. Developmental Review, 12, 1-44.

Garcia-Retamero, R., & Dhami, M. K. (2009). Take-the-best in expert-novice decision
strategies for residential burglary. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16 163-169.

Gendreau, P., & Goggin, C. (1999). The effects of prison sentences on recidivism.
Retrieved from http://www. prisonpolicy.org/scans/e199912.htm

Hogg, M. A., & Vaughan, G. M. (2008). Social psychology: An introduction. Essex:
Pearson.

Home Office (1996). Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996. Retrieved from
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1996/25/contents

Home Office (1985). Interception of Communications Act 1985. Retrieved from
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1985/56/contents

32	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

Home Office (2011). Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) and
accompanying codes of practice. Retrieved from

http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/publications/police/operational-policing/pace-codes/

Home Office (2000). Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000. Retrieved from

http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/counter-terrorism/regulation-investigatory-powers/ripa-

codes-of-practice

Home Office (2005). Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005. Retrieved from
http://www.legislation.gov.uk.ukpga/2005/15/contents

Horowitz, L. M., & Strack, S. (2011). Handbook of interpersonal psychology: Theory,
research, assessment and therapeutic interventions. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons.

Huffaker, D. (2010). Dimensions of leadership and social influence in online
communities. Human Communication Research, 36, 593-617.

Hui, P., & Buchegger, S. (2009). Groupthink and peer pressure: Social influence in
online social network groups. Asonam. International Conference on Advances in
Social Network Analysis and Mining, 53-59.

Johnson, E., & Payne, J. (1976). The decision to commit a crime: An information
processing analysis. In D. B. Cornish, & R. V. Clarke (Eds.), The reasoning criminal
(pp. 170-185). New York: Springer-Verlag.

Kahle, L. R., & Kim, C. (2006). (Eds.). Creating images and the psychology of
marketing communication. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

King, S. B. (2011). Military social influence in the global information environment: A
civilian primer. Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy, 11.

Knight, F. H. (1921/1964). Risk, uncertainty, and profit. New York: Sentry Press.

Lee, E. (2005). Effects of the influence agent’s sex and self-confidence on
informational social influence in computer-mediated communication. Communication
Research, 32, 29-58.

Lewicki, R., McAllister, D., & Bies, R. (1998). Trust and distrust: New relationships
and realities. Academy of Management Review, 23, 438-455.

Maio, G. R., & Haddock, G. (2009). The psychology of attitudes and attitude change.
London: Sage.

Mann, I. (2008). Hacking the human: Social engineering techniques and security and
countermeasures. Hampshire: Gower Publishing Limited.

Marcus, A., & Perez, A. (2005). m-YouTube Mobile UI: Video selection based on
social influence. Human-Computer Interaction, 926-932.

33	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

McDaniels, T. L. (1988). Comparing expressed and revealed preferences for risk
reduction: Different hazards and question frames. Risk Analysis, 8, 593-604.

Miller, M. D., & Brunner, C. C. (2008). Social impact in technologically-mediated
communication: An examination of online influence. Computers in Human Behavior,
24, 2972-2991.

Mischel, W. (1973). Toward a cognitive social learning reconceptualisation of
personality. Psychological Review, 80, 252-283.

Nagayama Hall, G. C., & Barongan, C. (2002). Multicultural psychology. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-hall.

Newman, G. R. (2009). Reducing terrorist opportunities: A framework for foreign
policy. Crime Prevention Studies, 25, 33-59.

Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2006). A meta-analytic test of intergroup conflict
theory. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 90, 751-783.

Postmes, T., Spears, R., Sakhel, K., & de Groot, K. (2001). Social influence in
computer-mediated communication: The effects of anonymity on group behaviour.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 1242-1254.

Savage, L. J. (1954). The foundations of statistics. New York: Wiley.

Slottje, P., Sluijs, J. P. van der, & Knol, A. B. (2008). Expert elicitation:

Methodological suggestions for its use in environmental health impact assessments.
Retrieved from http://www.nusap.net/downloads/reports/Expert Elicitation.pdf

Slovic, P. (1995). The construction of preference. American Psychologist, 50, 364-
371.

Smith, P. B., & Bond, M. H. (1998). Social psychology across cultures (2nd Edition).
Hemel Hempstead: Prentice-Hall.

Snook, B., Dhami, M. K., & Kavanagh, J. (2010). Simply criminal: Predicting burglars’
occupancy decisions with a simple heuristic. Law and Human Behavior.

Snook, B., Eastwood, J., Gendreau, P., Goggin, C., & Cullen, R. M. (2007). Taking
stock of criminal profiling: A narrative review and meta-analysis. Criminal Justice and
Behavior, 34, 437-453.

Tunnell, K. D. (2002). The impulsiveness and routinization of decision-making. In A.
R. Piquero, & S. G. Tibbets (Eds.), Rational choice and criminal behaviour: Recent
research and future challenges (pp. 265-278). New York: Routledge.

UK Government (2010a). A strong Britain in an age of uncertainty: National Security
Strategy. London: The Stationary Office.

34	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

UK Government (2010b). A strong Britain in an age of uncertainty: Strategic Defence
and Security Review. London: The Stationary Office.

von Hirsch, A., Bottoms, A., Burney, E., & Wikstrom, P-O. (1999). Criminal
deterrence and sentencing severity. Oxford: Hart Publishing.

Wortley, R. (2001). A classification of techniques for controlling situational
precipitators of crime. Security Journal, 14, 63-82.

Wortley, R. (2008). Situational precipitators of crime. In R. Wortley, & L. Mazerolle
(Eds.), Environmental criminology and crime analysis. Cullumpton: Willan.

Yun, M. (2009). An application of situational crime prevention to terrorist hostage
taking and kidnapping: A case study of 23 Korean hostages in Afghanistan. Crime
Prevention Studies, 25, 111-139.

35	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

Annex A

TOP SECRET

Examples of Social Influence Techniques and Other Relevant

Behavioural Approaches

Impression Management/Self-presentation:

•	Matching others’ behaviour

•	Conforming to situational norms

•	Ingratiation

•	Consistency of self

•	Self-promotion

•	Credible intimidation

•	Exemplary behaviour and

•	Supplication (i.e., needing help)

Persuasive Communication:

•	Recipient must have access to the message

•	Recipient must attend to the message

•	Recipient must understand the message

•	Recipient must accept the message

•	Recipient must remember the message

•	Recipient must behave according to the message

Propaganda:

•	Using stereotypes

•	Substituting names/labels for neutral ones

•	Censorship or systematic selection of information

•	Repetition

•	Assertions without arguments

•	Presenting a message for and against a subject

Reducing Prejudicial Attitudes:

•	Increasing contact with the person or object against which the prejudice is
directed. This contact should be:

o	Of equal status
o In a cooperative context
o Frequent

o	Not anxiety or threat inducing
o Encouraging positive cross-group relations

Encouraging Obedience:

•	Engaging the norm of reciprocity

•	Engendering liking (e.g., via ingratiation or attractiveness)

•	Stressing the importance of social validation (e.g., via highlighting that others
have also complied)

•	Instilling a sense of scarcity or secrecy

36	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

•	Getting the “foot-in-the-door” (i.e., getting compliance to a small request/issue
first)

•	Applying the “door-in-the-face” or “low-ball” tactics (i.e., asking for compliance
on a large request/issue first and having hidden aspects to a request/issue
that someone has already complied with, respectively)

Discouraging Obedience:

•	Educating people about the adverse consequences of compliance

•	Encouraging them to question authority

•	Exposing them to examples of disobedience

Encouraging Majorities to Conform to Minorities:

•	Showing a sense of consistency

•	Demonstrated investment

•	Independence

•	Balanced judgment

•	Similarity to the majority in terms of age, gender and social category.

Beginning and Maintaining Interpersonal Relationships:

•	Proximity

•	Exposure

•	Familiarity

•	Similarity

•	Physical attractiveness

•	Reciprocal self-disclosure

Encouraging Distrust:

•	Perceptions of the distrustree’s values, attitudes and intentions

•	Perceptions of the distrustree’s reputation

•	Perceptions of the distrustree’s group membership

•	Group or organisational context, structure and norms

Crime Prevention:

•	Identify and alter perceptions of the benefits

•	Highlight acceptable alternatives that yield the desired benefits

•	Emphasise the low probabilities of obtaining the benefits

•	Emphasise the undesirability of the drawbacks

•	Emphasise the higher probabilities of incurring the drawbacks

•	Soft techniques:

o	Reducing frustration and stress
o Avoiding disputes
o Posting instructions
o Neutralizing peer pressure
o Discouraging imitation
o Alerting conscience
o Assisting compliance

37	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

Relevant Issues in Advertising and Marketing:

•	Branding

•	Product placement

•	Sales promotions

•	Niche marketing

•	Crowd sourcing

•	Herd behaviour

•	Market segmentation

•	Public relations

•	Viral advertising/marketing

•	Internet/digital/online/web or e- marketing and advertising

38	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

Annex B

TOP SECRET

Recommended Reading List for Relevant Behavioural Science Support

*JTRIG has now acquired this material.

Adams, B. D., & Sartori, J. A. (2005). The dimensionality of trust. DRDC Toronto No.
CR-2005-204.

*Bachmann, R., & Zaheer, A. (2006). (Eds.), Handbook of trust research.

Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.

*Cialdini, R. B. (2009). Influence: Science and practice. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Clow, K. E., & Baack, D. (2007). Integrated advertising, promotion, and marketing
communications. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.

*Dhami, M. K., & Mandel, D. R. (in press). Crime as risk taking. Psychology, Crime
and Law.

*Fiske, S. T. (2010). Social beings: Core motives in psychology. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons.

Fiske, S. T., Gilbert, D. T., & Lindzey, G. (2010). (Eds.), Handbook of social
psychology. New York: Wiley.

*Forgas, J. P., Cooper, J., & Crano, W. D. (2010). (Eds.), The psychology of attitudes
and attitude change. London: Psychology Press.

*Garcia-Retamero, R., & Dhami, M. K. (2009). Take-the-best in expert-novice
decision strategies for residential burglary. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16 163-
169.

Hogg, M. A., & Vaughan, G. M. (2008). Social psychology: An introduction. Essex:
Pearson.

*Horowitz, L. M., & Strack, S. (2011). Handbook of interpersonal psychology: Theory,
research, assessment and therapeutic interventions. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons.

Kahle, L. R., & Kim, C. (2006). (Eds.). Creating images and the psychology of
marketing communication. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Lewicki, R., McAllister, D., & Bies, R. (1998). Trust and distrust: New relationships
and realities. Academy of Management Review, 23, 438-455.

Maio, G. R., & Haddock, G. (2009). The psychology of attitudes and attitude change.
London: Sage.

39	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

Mann, I. (2008). Hacking the human: Social engineering techniques and security and
countermeasures. Hampshire: Gower Publishing Limited.

Nagayama Hall, G. C., & Barongan, C. (2002). Multicultural psychology. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-hall.

*Smith, P. B., & Bond, M. H. (1998). Social psychology across cultures (2nd Edition).
Hemel Hempstead: Prentice-Hall.

Wortley, R. (2008). Situational precipitators of crime. In R. Wortley, & L. Mazerolle
(Eds.), Environmental criminology and crime analysis. UK: Cullumpton.

40	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

Annex C

TOP SECRET

Suggested Components of Training Module for JTRIG

Training exercises ought to:

(1)	Provide the scientific and technical, and operational planning and
management knowledge (see list below) necessary for conducting successful,
secure and safe effects and online HUMINT operations.

(2)	Examine how well material has been understood.

(3)	Apply knowledge to practical applications.

(4)	Examine performance in practice.

Scientific and Technical Knowledge

(Social) scientific:

•	Human behaviour in cyberspace

•	Psychology of (social) influence

•	Psychology applied to advertising and marketing

•	Personality psychology and profiling

•	Psychology of trust and distrust, and relationships

•	Rational choice approaches to crime and crime prevention techniques

•	Cultural psychology

•	Scientific methods and analysis

Technical:

•	Target capabilities

•	Internet profiling

•	Creating videos, photos, and other media

•	Building websites and other web platforms

•	ETC

Operational Planning and Management Knowledge

Planning operations:

•	Specifying goals

•	Selecting methods/techniques

•	Predicting outcomes

•	Assessing risk

•	Identifying measures of effectiveness/success/outcomes

•	Operational security

•	Legal and policy mandates

•	JTRIG’s code of conduct/practice guidelines

•	Deconfliction protocols

•	Governance process

Managing operations:

•	Continued risk assessment

41	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

•	Measuring effectiveness/success/outcomes

•	Report write-up

•	Operational debrief

42	of 42

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on	email ^^J@gchq.gsi.gov.uk

TOP SECRET