 

TDP 

Naticnal Security Agencyf?entral Security Service 1? January 2013

Infc rrnaticn Pap er

 

Subject: TD USA, NSA Intelligence Relationship with Germany -
Eundesnach richtendienst 

TD LISA, NSA established a with its
SIGINT counterpart in Germany, the in 1952, which includes extensive
analytical, dperatidnal, and technical exchanges. In the past year, Germany displayed
eagerness and self?suf?ciency in its SIGINT activities and assumed
greater risk in cf US. intelligence needs and td 
sharing within the German gdvernment, with cdalitjdn partners, and NSA. The END
emerging cdunterterrdrism intelligence with the
German demestjc services, taking steps td strengthen its SIGINT Develdpment 
capabilities td a key technical advisdry and rdle within Germany. Edth

partners have reed td maintain an intelli ence fecus en GT, transnatjdnal drganiaed
crime. muntemamnucs (Cm.
Special Interest Alien Smuggling (SIA), and US. and cdalitjdn td Afghanistan
[the Afghanistan SIGINT Gdalitidn In 2012, NSA welcdmed END President
Schindler?s eagerness td strengthen and expand bilateral and eratjdn and is 
new analytic tepics cf mutual interest including Africah and
(CW?related activities. In U.S.?German cyber activity, NSA ccntinues

td encdurage END participatjdn in fdundatjdnal cyber defense discussidns td
its patential td previde a technical 

Assurance and |I'Sdmputer Defense Relatidnship with
Germany.

The Assurance Directdrate has a hang?standing relatidnship
with the Eundesamt fi'Ir Sicherheit in der the Federal (21ch
cf Security. After the German deernment anndunced their |I'Gybersecurity
Strategy and identified ESI as the lead Agency fer cyber defense, ESI expressed great
interest in expanding the assurance partnership td include cdmputer
defense cellabdratidn en cyber threats. Key Parthers within the German
deernment aldng with ESI, are Eundesamt fi'Ir Federal Of?ce
fer Pretectidn cf the and END. While erv and END have net been traditjdnal
IA partners, the expansidn td include GND will dpen additidnal td develdp
with the German agencies fer analysis and SIGINT. IAD and
the NSAIGSS Threat |Center (NTDG) may be able td leverage the fermal
partnership the NSA Signals Intelligence Directdrate is pursuing with erv and its
already relatidnship with END [which is previding SIGINT td GND fer

Derived Frcm: 1-52
Dated: EDDTDIDE
Declassify Du: 20350301
TDP 

TDP SEERETHS HEN DF URN

Germany?s cyber defense efferts.) A draft IA and CND lvlemerandum ef Understanding
(lleU) fer CND cellaberatien is in the ceerdinatien precess at NSA. ESI and END will
beth be signateries.

1. Key: Issues:

Issue (SHSIHNFJI The END has been werking te influence the German
Gevernment te relax interpretatien efthe privacy laws ever the leng term te previde
greater eppertunity fer intelligence sharing. In the near term. NSA decided te right?
size its presence at the Jeint SIGINT Activity in Ead Aibling. Germany based
en current missien needs and fiscal realities. In lvlay 2012 NSA turned ever full
respensibility ef the cellectien missien te the END. aJlewing 
representatienal team te cultivate new ceeperative eppertunities with Germany.

Issue (SHSIHREL TD USA. Chief. Special U.S. Liaisen Activity Germany
centinues te werk with DNI Representative Eerlin en new CT initiatives
between NSA and the EW and with ether German demestic agencies as apprepriate.
NSA has develeped a significant level ef trust and intelligence sharing with the EW
since the 200? arrests ef the Islamic Jihad Unien members in Germany which
resulted in regular U.S.?German analytic exchanges and cleser ceeperatien in
tracking beth German and hen?German extremist targets. NSA aJse has held several
multilateral tech nicaJ meetings with te intreduce 

methed elegy and tradeeraft te impreve the Efv?s ability te expleit. filter. and precess
demestic data accesses and petentiaily develep larger cellectien access peints that
ceuld bene?t beth Germany and the US. The END supperts emerging CT
intelligence relatien ship with the EW. taking steps te strengthen its 
capabilities te perferm a key technical advisery and suppert rele within Germany. Te
facilitate ceeperatien. an NSA CT analyst. statiened in Berlin. eccupies ef?ce space
in Efv headquarters ene day per week te nurture the relatienship and facilitate U.S.
reduirements. Likewise. the Germans develeped a cemmunicatiens link impreving the
cennectivity between NSA and EfvaND. as well as the timeliness ef the intelligence
exchange.

Issue NSA IAD. SID and NTDC are interested in leveraging Germany?s
accesses and capabilities te discever threats and vulnerabilities which previde timely
warnings ef attacks against US. Gevernment and critical infrastructure netwerks. In
December 2012. representatives frem NTDC and FAD met with ESI and END in
Germany fer bilateral CND discussiens. As a result ef the engagement. an analytical
exchange was held in January 2013.

m:

NSA's in?ceuntry representative is the Chief. SUSLAG. lecated en lvlangfaJl
Kaserne in Ead Aibling. Germany. SUSLAG has 10 persennel. censisting cf 12 NSA
civilians and six centracters. NSA has plans te reduce the SUSLAG werkferce te
appreximately six persennel in FY 2013.

TDP 

TDP 

TD USA. 1|tt'v'hat we previde ID the partner: NSA has previded a
significant ameunt ef hardware and seftware at END expense. as well as asseciated
analytic expertise te help the END independently maintain its capability.
NSA alse exchanges intelligence reperting en beth military and nen?military targets.

NSA is previded access te 

cemmunicatiens supperting CN. CT. and 1|v'v'eapens ef Ivlass Destructien
missiens and is an impertant seurce ef infermatien en drug trafficking and

ferce pretectien in Afghanistan. The END prevides Igbe Ian ua suppert by
translating NSA cellectien ef a high?value. time?sensitive?target NSA is
seeking the preper apprevals te accept END language suppert in

In additien te the day?te?day cellectien. the Germans have effered
NSA unidue accesses in high interest target areas.

Success steries:

TD USA. Germany has beceme an active participant in the AFSC.
werking clesely with ether member ceuntries and embracing the new AFSC Divisien
ef Effert. under which each member ceuntry is respensible fer cevering a speci?c
area ef interest te the AFSC and then sharing reperting and metadata en that area
with the ether AFSC members. AFSC member ceuntries include: the US. UK.
Canada. Australia. New Zealand. Eelgium. Denmark. France. Germany. Italy.
Nerway. the Netherlands. Spain and Sweden.

TD USA. Having medernized its cemmunicatiens infrastructure
in suppert ef its unique access in he END
became the third largest centributer te the Real Time?Regienal Gateway 
analysis and precessing teel.

TD USA. The German gevernment medi?ed its interpretatien efthe
Privacy Law. pretecting the cemmunicatiens ef German citizens. te afferd the
END mere flexibility in sharing pretected infermatien with fereign partners.

USA. The END has previded unidue sustained cellectien ef
targets such as inistry ef Fereign Affairs Glebal
System fer Ivlebile Cemmunicatiens - GSM. and- ?v'eice ever
Internet Pretecel 

Preblemsthallenges with the partner: Since 2000 NSA has started te
fester ether areas ef ceeperatien with the END te satisfy US. intelligence
requirements at an apprepriate level ef investment The inability te
successfully address German privacy law issues has limited seme eperatiens.
but NSA welcemed German willingness te take risks and te pursue new 

fer ceeperatien with the US. particularly in the CT realm. NSA is en te heldin a
diale ue en tepics te address mutual intelligence gaps. includingH

?and CP?related activities.

TD use. Fvev} Prepared by: Ceuntry Desk foicer (ceet

TDP 

TDP 

German . 

TDP 

