EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL POLICIES

POLICY DEPARTMENT f

CITIZENS" RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

Constitutional Affairs

Justice, Freedom and Security

Gender Equality
Legal and Parliamentary Affairs

Petitions

The US surveillance
programmes and their
impact on EU citizens'
fundamental rights

NOTE

tUKUPLAN FflflUfiíBEm

DIRECTORATE GENERAL FOR INTERNAL POLICIES
POLICY DEPARTMENT C:

CITIZENS' RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

CIVIL LIBERTIES, JUSTICE AND HOME AFFAIRS

The US surveillance programmes
and their impact on EU citizens'
fundamental rights

NOTE

Abstract

In light of the recent PRISM-related revelations, this briefing note analyzes
the impact of US surveillance programmes on European citizens' rights. The
note explores the scope of surveillance that can be carried out under the US
FISA Amendments Act 2008, and related practices of the US authorities
which have very strong implications for EU data sovereignty and the
protection of European citizens' rights.

PE 474.405

EN

This document was requested by the European Parliament's Committee on Civil Liberties,
Justice and Home Affairs.

AUTHORS

Mr Caspar BOWDEN (Independent Privacy Researcher)

Introduction by Prof. Didier BIGO
(King's College London /

Director of the Centre d'Etudes sur les Conflits, Liberté et Sécurité - CCLS, Paris, France).
Copy-Editing: Dr. Amandine SCHERRER

(Centre d'Etudes sur les Conflits, Liberté et Sécurité - CCLS, Paris, France)

Bibliographical assistance: Wendy Grossman

RESPONSIBLE ADMINISTRATOR

Mr Alessandro DAVOLI

Policy Department Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs
European Parliament
B-1047 Brussels

E-mail: alessandro.davoli@europarl.europa.eu

LINGUISTIC VERSIONS

Original: EN

ABOUT THE EDITOR

To contact the Policy Department or to subscribe to its monthly newsletter please write to:
poldep-citizens@europarl.europa.eu

Manuscript completed in September 2013.

Source: European Parliament © European Union, 2013.

This document is available on the Internet at:
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/studies

DISCLAIMER

The opinions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do
not necessarily represent the official position of the European Parliament.

Reproduction and translation for non-commercial purposes are authorized, provided the
source is acknowledged and the publisher is given prior notice and sent a copy.

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

CONTENTS

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS	4

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY	5

INTRODUCTION	6

1.	HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF US SURVEILLANCE	10

1.1 World War II and the origins of the UKUSA treaties	10

1.2 ECHELON: the UKUSA communications surveillance nexus	11

1.3	1975-1978: Watergate and the Church Committee	11

1.4	The post-9/11 context: extension of intelligence powers	12

1.5	Edward Snowden's revelations and PRISM	13

1.5.1	"Upstream"	13

1.5.2	XKeyscore	13

1.5.3	BULLRUN	14

2.	NSA PROGRAMMES AND RELATED LEGISLATION: CONTROVERSIES,

GAPS AND LOOPHOLES AND IMPLICATIONS FOR EU CITIZENS	16

2.1	Legal gaps and uncertainties of US privacy law: implications for US citizens and

residents	16

2.1.1	The Third Party Doctrine and limitations to the Fourth Amendment	16

2.1.2	CDRs and the 'Relevance Test'	17

2.1.3	'Direct Access' to data-centres granted for surveillance purposes?	18

2.1.4	Intelligence Agencies' 'Black Budget': scale and costs of US capabilities 19

2.2	Situation of non-US citizens and residents (non 'USPERs')	19

2.2.1	The political definitions of 'foreign information intelligence'	19

2.2.2	Specific powers over communications of non-US persons	20

2.2.3	The Fourth Amendment does not apply to non-USPERs outside the US 20

2.2.4	Cloud computing risks for non-US persons	21

2.2.5	There are no privacy rights recognised by US authorities for non-US persons

under FISA	23

2.3	Data export: false solutions and insufficient safeguards	24

2.3.1	Safe Harbour,BCRs for processors and Cloud Computing	24

2.3.2	Model Contracts	26

3.	STRATEGIC OPTIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE EUROPEAN

PARLIAMENT	28

3.1	Reducing exposure and growing a European Cloud	28

3.2	Reinstating 'Article 42'	28

3.3	Whistle-Blowers' Protection and Incentives	30

3.4	Institutional Reform	30

3.5	Data Protection Authorities and Governance	30

CONCLUSION	33

REFERENCES	35

3

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

ACLU	American Civil Liberties Union
AUMF	Authorization to Use Military Force
CIA	Central Intelligence Agency
CNIL	Comité National pour l'Informatique et les Libertés
DPAs	Data Protection Authorities
EDPS	European Data Protection Supervisor
ENISA	European Network and Information Security Agency
FAA	Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Amendments Act (2008)
FBI	Federal Bureau of Investigation
FIVE EYES	UK, US, Canada, Australia, New Zealand: sharing intelligence under UKUSA
FISA	Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (1978)
FISC	Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
FISCR	Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review
NSA	National Security Agency
PAA	Protect America Act (2007)
SHA	EU-US Safe Harbour Agreement (2000)
TIA	Total Information Awareness
WP29	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party

4

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This Briefing note provides the LIBE Committee with background and contextual
information on PRISM/FISA/NSA activities and US surveillance programmes, and their
specific impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights, including privacy and data protection.

Prior to the PRISM scandal, European media underestimated this aspect, apparently
oblivious to the fact that the surveillance activity was primarily directed at the rest-of-the-
world, and was not targeted at US citizens. The note argues that the scope of surveillance
under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 Amendments Act of 2008 (FAA) has
very strong implications on EU data sovereignty and the protection of its citizens' rights.

The first section provides a historical account of US surveillance programmes,

showing that the US authorities have continuously disregarded the human right to privacy
of non-Americans. The analysis of various surveillance programmes (Echelon, PRISM) and
US national security legislation (FISA, PATRIOT and FAA) clearly indicates that surveillance
activities by the US authorities are conducted without taking into account the rights of non-
US citizens and residents. In particular, the scope of FAA creates a power of mass-
surveillance specifically targeted at the data of non-US persons located outside the US,
including data processed by 'Cloud computing', which eludes EU Data Protection regulation.

The second section gives an overview of the main legal gaps, loopholes and
controversies of these programmes and their differing consequences for the
rights of American and EU citizens. The section unravels the legal provisions governing
US surveillance programmes and further uncertainties in their application, such as:

-	serious limitations to the Fourth Amendment for US citizens

-	specific powers over communications and personal data of "non-US persons"

-	absence of any cognizable privacy rights for "non-US persons" under FISA

The section also shows that the accelerating and already widespread use of Cloud
computing further undermines data protection for EU citizens, and that a review of some of
the existing and proposed mechanisms that have been put in place to protect EU citizens'
rights after data export, actually function as loopholes.

Finally, some strategic options for the European Parliament are developed, and

related recommendations are suggested in order to improve future EU regulation and to
provide effective safeguards for protection for EU citizens' rights.

5

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

INTRODUCTION

Background

This Briefing note aims at providing the LIBE Committee with background and contextual
information on PRISM/FISA/NSA activities and US surveillance programmes and their
impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights, including privacy and data protection.

On June 5th the Washington Post and The Guardian published a secret order made under
s.215 of the PATRIOT Act requiring the Verizon telephone company to give the NSA details
of all US domestic and international phone calls, and "on an ongoing basis". On June 6th the
two newspapers revealed the existence of an NSA programme codenamed PRISM that
accessed data from leading brands of US Internet companies. By the end of the day a
statement from Adm. Clapper (Director of NSA) officially acknowledged the PRISM
programme and that it relied on powers under the FISA Amendments Act (FAA) 2008 s.702
(aka §1881a). On June 9th Edward Snowden voluntarily disclosed his identity and a film
interview with him was released.

In the European Parliament resolution of 4 July 2013 on the US National Security Agency
surveillance programme, MEPs expressed serious concern over PRISM and other
surveillance programmes and strongly condemned spying on EU official representatives and
called on the US authorities to provide them with full information on these allegations
without further delay. Inquiries by the Commission1, Art.29 Working Party1 2, and a few MS
Parliaments are also in progress.

The problem of transnational mass surveillance and democracy3

Snowden's revelations about PRISM show that Cyber mass-surveillance at the transnational
level induces systemic breaches of fundamental rights. These breaches lead us to question
the scale of transnational mass surveillance and its implications for our democracies.

"Our government in its very nature, and our open society in all its instinct,
under the Constitution and the Bill of Rights automatically outlaws intelligence
organizations of the kind that have developed in police states" (Allen Dulles, 1963)4

"There's been spying for years, there's been surveillance for years, and so
forth, I'm not going to pass judgement on that, it's the nature of our society"

(Eric Schmidt, Executive chairman of Google, 2013)

These two quotations are distinct in time by 50 years. They differ in the answers but
address the same central question: how far can democratic societies continue to exist in
their very nature, if intelligence activities include massive surveillance of populations? For
Eric Schmidt and according to most of the media reports in the world, the nature of society

1	European Commissioner - Reding, Viviane (2013), Letter to the Attorney General, Ref. Ares (2013)1935546 -
10/06/2013, Brussels, 10 June 2013

2	Article 29 Working Party, Letter from the Chairman to Mrs Reding regarding the PRISM program 13th August
2013

3	Preface by Prof.Didier Bigo

4	Dulles, Allen Welsh (1963), The Craft of Intelligence, New York: Harper&Row, p.257.

6

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

has changed. Technologies of telecommunication, including mobile phones, Internet,
satellites and more generally all data which can be digitalised and integrated into platforms,
have given the possibilities of gathering unprecedented amount of data, to keep them, to
organise them, to search them. If the technologies exist, then they have to be used: "it is
not possible to go against the flow". Therefore it is not a surprise to discover that
programmes run by intelligence services use these techniques at their maximum
possibilities and in secrecy. The assumption is that if everyone else with these technical
capabilities uses them, then we should too. If not, it would be naivety or even worse: a
defeat endangering the national security of a country by letting another country benefit
from the possibilities opened by these technologies.

However, should we have to live with this extension of espionage to massive surveillance of
populations and accept it as "a fact"? Fortunately, totalitarian regimes have more or less
disappeared before the full development of theses capacities. Today, in democratic
regimes, when these technologies are used, they are limited on purpose and are mainly
centred on antiterrorism collaboration, in order to prevent attempts of attacks. According to
Intelligence Services worldwide, these technologies are not endangering civil liberties; they
are the best way to protect the citizen from global terrorism. Intelligence services screen
suspicious behaviours and exchange of information occurs at the international level. Only
"real suspects" are, in principle, under surveillance. From this perspective, far from being a
"shame", the revelations of programmes like PRISM could be seen as a proof of a good
level of collaboration, which has eventually to be enhanced in the future against numerous
forms of violence.

In front of this "recital" given by the most important authorities of the different intelligence
services and the antiterrorism agencies in the US, in the UK, in France, and at the EU level,
it is critical to discuss the supposedly new nature of our societies. The impact of
technological transformations in democratic societies, how to use these technologies as
resources for both information exchange and competition over information (a key element
of a globalised world), what are the rights of the different governments in processing them:
these are the core questions.

As stated by Allen Dulles above, justifications given by intelligence services work in favour
of a police state and against the very nature of an open society living in democratic
regimes. Proponents of an open society insist that, against the previous trend, technologies
ought not to drive human actions; they have to be used in reasonable ways and under the
Rule of Law. The mass scaling has to be contained. Constitutional provisions have to be
applied, and the presumption of innocence is applicable for all human beings (not only
citizens). If suspicions exist, they have to be related to certain forms of crime, and not
marginal behaviours or life styles. Hence, what is at stake here is not the mechanisms by
which antiterrorism laws and activities have to be regulated at the transatlantic level, even
if it is a subset of the question. It is not even the question of espionage activities between
different governments. It is the question of the nature, the scale, and the depth of
surveillance that can be tolerated in and between democracies.

Snowden's revelations highlight numerous breaches of fundamental rights. This affects in
priority all the persons whose data have been extracted via surveillance of communications,
digital cables or cloud computing technologies, as soon as they are under a category of
suspicion, or of some interest for foreign intelligence purposes. However, all these persons
are not protected in the same way, especially if they are not US citizens. The EU citizen is
therefore particularly fragile in this configuration connecting US intelligence
services, private companies that provide services at the global level and the
ownership they can exercise over their data. It is clear that if EU citizens do not have
the same level of protections as the US citizens, because of the practices of the US
intelligence services and the lack of effective protections, they will become the first victims
of these systems. Freedom of thought, opinion, expression and of the press are cardinal
values that have to be preserved. Any citizen of the EU has the right to have a private life,

7

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

i.e, a life which is not fully under the surveillance of any state apparatus. The investigative
eyes of any government have to be strongly reminded of distinctions between private and
public activities, between what is a crime and what is simply a different life-style. By
gathering massive data on life-styles in order to elaborate patterns and profiles concerning
political attitudes and economic choices, PRISM seems to have allowed an unprecedented
scale and depth in intelligence gathering, which goes beyond counter-terrorism and beyond
espionage activities carried out by liberal regimes in the past. This may lead towards an
illegal form of Total Information Awareness where data of millions of people are subject to
collection and manipulation by the NSA.

This note wants to assess this question of the craft of intelligence and its necessary limits in
democracy and between them. As we will see, through the documents delivered by
Snowden, the scale of the PRISM programme is global; its depth reaches the digital data of
large groups of populations and breaches the fundamental rights of large groups of
populations, especially EU citizens. The EU institutions have therefore the right and duty to
examine this emergence of cyber mass-surveillance and how it affects the fundamental
rights of the EU citizen abroad and at home.

Privacy governance: EU/US competing models

A careful analysis of US privacy laws compared to the EU Data Protection framework shows
that the former allows few practical options for the individual to live their lives with self-
determination over their personal data. However a core effect of Data Protection law is that
if data is copied from one computer to another, then providing the right legal conditions for
transfer exist, the individual cannot object on the grounds that their privacy risk increases
through every such proliferation of "their" data5. This holds true if the data is copied onto a
thousand machines in one organization, or spread onward to a thousand organisations, or
to a different legal regime in a Third Country. The individual cannot stop this once they lose
possession of their data, whereas for example if the data was "intellectual property", then a
license to reproduce the data would be necessary by permission. We are all the authors of
our lives, and it seems increasingly anomalous that Internet companies lay claim to
property rights in the patterns of data minutely recording our thoughts and behaviour, yet
ask the people who produce this data to sacrifice their autonomy and take privacy on trust.

The EU Data Protection framework in theory is categorically better than the US for privacy,
but in practice it is hard to find any real-world Internet services that implement DP
principles by design, conveniently and securely.

Privacy governance around the world has evolved around two competing models. Europe
made some rights of individuals inalienable and assigned responsibilities to Data Controller
organizations, whereas in the United States companies inserted waivers of rights into
Terms and Conditions6 contracts allowing exploitation of data in exhaustive ways (known as
the 'Notice-and-Choice" principle).

The PRISM crisis arose directly from the emerging dominance over the last decade of "free"
services operated from remote warehouses full of computer servers, by companies
predominantly based in US jurisdiction, that has become known as Cloud computing. To
explain this relationship we must explore details of the US framework of national security
law.

5	Hondius, Frits W (1975), Emerging data protection in Europe. North-Holland Pub. Co.

6	cf. the documentary "Terms and Conditions May Apply" (2013, USA) dir. Cullen Holback.

8

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

Scope and structure

It is striking that since the first reports of "warrantless wiretapping" in the last decade, and
until quite recently in the PRISM-related revelations, European media have covered US
surveillance controversies as if these were purely parochial arguments about US civil
liberties, apparently oblivious that the surveillance activity was directed at the rest-of-
the-world.

This note aims to document this under-appreciated aspect. It will show that the scope of
surveillance conducted under a change in the FISA law in 2008 extended its scope beyond
interception of communications to include any data in public cloud computing as well. This
has very strong implications for the EU's continued sovereignty over data and the
protection of its citizens' rights. The aim is here to provide a guide to how surveillance of
Internet communications by the US government developed, and how this affects the human
right to privacy, integrating historical, technical, and policy analysis from the perspective of
the individual EU citizen7. The Note will therefore cover the following:

-	(I) An account of US foreign surveillance history and current known state

-	(II) An overview of the main legal controversies both in US terms, and the effects
and consequences for EU citizens' rights

-	(III) Strategic options for the European Parliament and recommendations

7	New stories based on Snowden's material were breaking throughout the drafting of this Note and whilst every
effort has been made to ensure accuracy, it is possible that further revelations could change the interpretations
given.

9

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

1.	HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF US SURVEILLANCE

KEY FINDINGS

•	A historical account of US various surveillance programmes (precursors to Echelon,
PRISM, etc.) and US legislation in the field of surveillance (FISA and FAA) shows
that the US has continuously disregarded the fundamental rights of non-US
citizens.

•	In Particular, the scope of FAA coupled with expressly 'political' definitions of what
constitutes 'foreign intelligence information’ creates a power of mass-
surveillance specifically targeted at the data of non-US persons located
outside the US, which eludes effective control by current and proposed EU Data
Protection regulation.

A historical account of US surveillance programmes provides the context for their
interpretation as the latest phase of a system of US exceptionalism, with origins in World
War II. These programmes constitute the greatest contemporary challenge to data
protection, because they incorporated arbitrary discriminatory standards of treatment
strictly according to nationality and geopolitical alliances, which are secret and incompatible
with the rule of law under EU structures.

1.1.	World War II and the origins of the UKUSA treaties

In the 1970s there were the first disclosures of the extent of Allied success in WWII
cryptanalysis. The world discovered the secret history of Bletchley Park (aka Station X),
Churchill's signals intelligence headquarters. The story of post-war secret intelligence
partnerships at the international level is intertwined with the personal trajectory of Alan
Turing, a great mathematician and co-founder of computer science, who was critical to the
effort to design automated machines which could feasibly solve ciphers generated by
machine, such as Enigma (used for many Nazi Germany communications).

Alan Turing travelled to the US in 1942 to supervise US Navy mass-production of the
decryption machines (called 'bombes') for the Atlantic war, and to review work on a new
scrambler telephone at Bell Laboratories to be used for communications between Heads of
Government. Unfortunately Turing was not equipped with any letters of authority, so he
was detained by US immigration as suspicious until rescued by UK officials in New York.
What was initially supposed to be a two-week trip turned into months, as no precedent
existed to grant even a foreign ally security clearance to the laboratories he was supposed
to visit. There followed several months of fraught UK diplomacy and turf wars between the
US Navy and Army, since the latter had no "need-to-know" about Ultra (the name given to
intelligence produced from decryption at Bletchley). The UK wanted as few people as
possible in on the secret, and the disharmony thus experienced inside the US military
security hierarchies became known as "the Turing Affair".

These were the origins of the post-war secret intelligence partnership between the US and
UK as "first" parties, Canada/Australia/New Zealand as second parties, and other nations
with lesser access as third parties. The treaty is named UKUSA, and we know the details
above about its genesis because in 2010 the US National Security Agency declassified the
unredacted text of UKUSA treaties8 up until the 1950s with related correspondence (the

8	UKUSA Agreement Release 1940-1956 Early Papers Concerning US-UK Agreement - 1940-1944, NSA/CSS

10

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

current text is secret). GCHQ9 did not declassify much in comparison, although the occasion
was billed as joint exercise.

The purpose of the UKUSA treaties was to establish defined areas of technical co-
operation and avoid conflicts. However, no general "no spy" clause appears in the
versions published up until the 1950s, but expressions of amity comparable to
public treaties. It is not known whether any comprehensive secret "no spy" agreement
exists today between the UK and US, and neither has ever given legislative or executive
comment on the matter.

1.2.	ECHELON: the UKUSA communications surveillance nexus

From the founding of the US National Security Agency (NSA) in 1952 throughout the Cold
War, both the UK and US vastly expanded their signal intelligence capacities, collecting
from undersea cables at landing points10 11, satellites intercepting terrestrial microwave
relays, and arrays of antennae usually sited in military bases and embassies. The evolution
and nature of these capabilities were documented from open source research in two
reports11 to the European institutions culminating in the Parliament's inquiry into ECHELON
in 2000. ECHELON was in fact a codeword for one particular surveillance system, but
became in common usage a synecdoche for the entire UKUSA communications surveillance
nexus. The last meeting the EP inquiry committee was on September 10, 2001. The
Committee recommended to the European Parliament that citizens of EU member states
use cryptography in their communications to protect their privacy, because
economic espionage with ECHELON had obviously been conducted by the US intelligence
agencies.

1.3.	1975-1978: Watergate and the Church Committee

After the US was convulsed by the Watergate scandal culminating in the resignation of
Richard Nixon, Senator Frank Church led a Congressional committee of inquiry into abuses
of power by law-enforcement and intelligence agencies which had conducted illegal
domestic wire-tapping of political and civic leaders under presidential authority, and
contrary to the Fourth Amendment of the US constitution which protects privacy against
unreasonable searches without a particular warrant, issued on "probable cause" (meaning
evidence of a 50% likelihood of criminality).

The Church inquiry reported on the question of whether the Fourth Amendment restricts
the mass-trawling and collection of international communications, which they discovered
had been secretly conducted since the 1940s on telegrams12. The inquiry canvassed that
inadvertent collection of Americans' data transmitted internationally was
tolerable, if procedures were made for "minimization" of erroneous unwarranted access
(and mistakes not used prejudicially against Americans).

9	Government Communications Head-Quarters, the UK national cryptologic and information national security
surveillance organisation, the descendent organisation from Bletchley Park.

10	This practice started with the earliest cables for telegraphy in the 19th century and was a crucial aspect of
Zimmerman Telegram affair which was influential in persuading America to join WW1. See: Desai, Anuj C. (2007),
Wiretapping Before the Wires: The Post Office and the Birth of Communications Privacy, Stanford Law Review, 60
STAN L. REV. 553 (2007).

11	STOA interception Capabilities 2000) and EuroParl ECHELON (2001) - reports by Duncan Campbell.

12	No formal authority for the SHAMROCK collection (or sister MINARET trawling) programme existed but at the
government's request a tape of all cables was delivered by courier every day to the NSA. See Snider, Britt L.
(1999): Unlucky SHAMROCK - Recollections from the Church Committee's Investigation of NSA.

11

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

This idea was codified into the first Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978

(FISA), which regulated the interception of international (and domestic) "foreign
intelligence information" from telecommunications carriers. Collection of data by any nation
from outside its territory is literally lawless and not restricted by any explicit international
agreements.

1.4.	The post-9/11 context: extension of intelligence powers

After the terrorist attacks of September 11th 2001, privacy and data protection has been
deeply challenged by exceptional measures taken in the name of security and the fight
against terrorism.

The USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 was enacted by the US Congress on October 26, 2001, and
its primary effect was to greatly extend law enforcement agencies' powers for gathering
domestic intelligence inside the US. The revised Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Amendment Act of 2008 (FAA)13 created a power of mass-surveillance specifically
targeted at the data of non-US persons located outside the US. These aspects and their
implications for EU citizens will be analysed in the following section (Section 2).

Numerous new surveillance programmes and modalities were further suggested to
President Bush by NSA Director Gen. Hayden, without explicit authorization under statute,
and approval was nevertheless given. Those programmes were retroactively deemed lawful
in secret memoranda prepared by a relatively junior legal13 14 official, under the Authorisation
to Use Military Force (AUMF) for the war in Afghanistan and associated War on Terror
operations.

Amongst these programmes was one codenamed Stellar Wind which involved placing fibre-
optic cable "splitters" in major Internet switching centres, and triaging the enormous
volumes of traffic in real-time with a small high-performance scanning computer (known as
a deep-packet inspection box), which would send data filtered by this means back to the
NSA. An AT&T technical supervisor in the San Francisco office was asked to assist in
constructing such a facility ("Room 641A") and was concerned that this activity manifestly
broke US Constitutional protections, because the cable carried domestic as well as
international traffic. He took his story with documentation to the New York Times, which did
not publish15 the story for a year, until 2005 after the re-election of President Bush.

Other whistle-blowers from the NSA, CIA and FBI emerged with tales of illegal mass-
surveillance via mobile phones, the Internet and satellites, and even revealed that phone
calls of Barack Obama16 (he was then Senator) and Supreme Court judges had been
tapped. The controversy was exacerbated because two years before, a former National
Security Adviser17 had proposed a research programme for Total Information Awareness -
T.I.A., a massive system of surveillance of all digital data, processed with advanced
artificial intelligence algorithms to detect terrorist plots. Immediate adverse media
commentary prompted the US Congress to de-fund research into T.I.A., but rumours
persisted that it had been absorbed into an intelligence "black budget".

13	US Congress (2008), Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 Amendments Act of 2008, 122 Stat. 2436,
Public Law 110-261, July 10, 2008.

14	John Yoo, who similarly gave a secret opinion that water-boarding was not torture and thus permissible.

15	New York Times, Bush Lets U.S. Spy on Callers Without Courts, Risen J, Lichtblau E, December 16, 2005.

16	Huffington Post, Russ Tice, Bush-Era Whistleblower, Claims NSA Ordered Wiretap Of Barack Obama In 2004,
20th June 2013.

17	Admiral John Poindexter, convicted in the Iran/Contra affair of the 1980s and pardoned by President Reagan.

12

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

When the "warrantless wiretapping" allegations surfaced in a series of press reports from
The New York Times, The Los Angeles Times, and The Wall Street Journal, the resonance
with the supposedly cancelled T.I.A project intensified the level of public unease.

1.5.	Edward Snowden's revelations and PRISM

On June 5th The Washington Post and The Guardian published a secret order made under
s.215 of the PATRIOT Act requiring the Verizon telephone company to give the NSA details
of all US domestic and international phone calls, and "on an ongoing basis". On June 6th
the two newspapers revealed the existence of an NSA programme codenamed PRISM,
which accessed data from leading brands of US Internet companies. By the end of the day
a statement from Adm.Clapper (Director of NSA) officially acknowledged the PRISM
programme and that it relied on powers under the FISA Amendment 2008 s.1881a/702. On
June 9th Edward Snowden voluntarily disclosed his identity and a film interview with him
was released.

The primary publication was in three newspapers: The Guardian, The Washington Post, and
Der Spiegel. Four journalists have played a central role in obtaining, analysing and
interpreting this material for the public: Barton Gellman, Laura Poitras, Jacob Appelbaum
and Glenn Greenwald. They were joined by The Guardian (US edition), the New York Times
in conjunction with ProPublica after the UK government insisted on destruction of The
Guardian's copy of the Snowden material in their London offices, under the supervision of
GCHQ18.

What can be referred to as the 'PRISM scandal' revealed a number of surveillance
programmes, including:

1.5.1	"Upstream"

The slides published from the Snowden material feature references to "Upstream" collection
programmes by the NSA adumbrated by various codewords. Data is copied from both
public and private networks to the NSA from international fibre-optic cables at landing
points, and from central exchanges which switch Internet traffic between the major
carriers, through agreements negotiated with (or legal orders served on) the operating
companies (and probably also by intercepting cables on the seabed19 when necessary).

1.5.2	XKeyscore

The XKeyscore system was described in slides20 (dated 200821) published by The Guardian
on the 31st of July. It is an "exploitation system/analytic framework", which enables
searching a "3 day rolling buffer" of "full take" data stored at 150 global sites on 700
database servers. The system integrates data collected22 from US embassy sites, foreign
satellite and microwave transmissions (i.e. the system formerly known as ECHELON), and
the "upstream" sources above.

The system indexes e-mail addresses, file names, IP addresses and port numbers, cookies,
webmail and chat usernames and buddylists, phone numbers, and metadata from web 18 19 20 21 22

18 It is outside the scope of this report to give a full analysis of what has been revealed, but in what follows it is
assumed that the slides and documents are authentic, and no serious suggestions have been made to the
contrary.

19	The existence US submarines specially equipped for intercepting undersea cables was outlined in the 2000 EP
ECHELON report cf. "Ivy Bells"

20	http://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/iul/31/nsa-xkevscore-programme-full-presentation

21	A job advertisement was posted by a defence contractor in July 2013 indicating the programme is still active.

22	http://theweek.com/article/index/247684/whats-xkeyscore

13

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

browsing sessions (including words typed into search engines and locations visited on
Google Maps). The distinctive advantage of the system is that it enables an analyst to
discover "strong selectors" (search parameters which identify or can be used to extract
data precisely about a target), and to look for "anomalous events" such as someone "using
encryption" or "searching for suspicious stuff".

The analyst can use the result of these index searches to "simply pull content from the site
as required". This system of unified search allows retrospective trawling through 3 days (as
of 2008) of a much greater volume of data than is feasible to copy back to the NSA.

The system can also do "Persona Session Collection" which means that an "anomalous
event" potentially characteristic of a particular target can be used to trigger automatic
collection of associated data, without knowledge of a "strong selector". It is also possible to
find "all the exploitable machines in country X" by matching the fingerprints of
configurations which show up in the data streams captured, with NSA's database of known
software vulnerabilities. The slides also say it is possible to find all Excel spreadsheets "with
MAC addresses coming out of Iraq"23.

Slide 17 is remarkable because it contained the first intimations of systemic compromise of
encryption systems24 (see BULLRUN below).

1.5.3	BULLRUN

BULLRUN25 is the codename for a NSA programme for the last decade for an "aggressive
multi-pronged effort to break into widely used encryption technologies", revealed in a joint
Guardian26/New York Times story on September 1st. This programme has caused the
greatest shock amongst the Internet technical security community of all the Snowden
material so far, and frantic efforts are underway worldwide to assess which systems might
be vulnerable, and to upgrade or change keys, ciphers and systems, not least because
adversaries in hostile countries will now be trying to discover any backdoor mechanisms
previously only known by the NSA.

The programme budget is $250m per annum, and may use some of the following methods:
collaboration with vendors of IT security products and software, mathematical cryptanalysis
and "side-channel" attacks, forging of public-key certificates, infiltrating and influencing
technical bodies towards adopting insecure standards, and likely use of coercive legal
orders to compel introduction of "backdoors". It is important to stress that no evidence has
emerged (yet) that the fundamental cipher algorithms in common use have been broken
mathematically, however over the past few years doubts have grown about vulnerabilities
in the complex "protocols" used to set-up and ensure compatibility amongst the software in
common use.

FISA 702 may require a service provider to "immediately provide the government with all
information, facilities, or assistance necessary to accomplish the acquisition" of foreign
intelligence information, and thus on its face could compel disclosure of cryptographic keys,

23	This seems anomalous because ostensibly Microsoft stopped incorporating the MAC address in the GUID (Global
Unique Identifier - a way of generating a unique document index number) with Office 2000, and MAC addresses
are not correlated to a particular country (unless somehow the NSA has obtained a comprehensive database or
built one somehow specially for Iraq or is able to monitor and collect WiFi signals at long range and/or
systematically).

24	"Show me all the VPN startups in country X, and give me the data so I can decrypt and discover the users" - a
VPN (Virtual Private Network) is an "encrypted tunnel" between the user's computer and a VPN provider, so
Internet traffic notionally appears to originate from the VPN provider rather than the user, for privacy and security
reasons.

25	The corresponding codename of the similar GCHQ cryptographic penetration programme is EDGEHILL, curiously
both names of battles from each country's civil war, and is outside the scope of this Note.

26	http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/05/nsa-gchq-encrvption-codes-securitv

14

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

including the SSL keys used to secure data-in-transit by major search engines, social
networks, webmail portals, and Cloud services in general. It is not yet known whether the
power has been used in this way.

15

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

2.	NSA PROGRAMMES AND RELATED LEGISLATION:
CONTROVERSIES, GAPS AND LOOPHOLES AND
IMPLICATIONS FOR EU CITIZENS

KEY FINDINGS

•	The complexity of inter-related US legislation pertaining to 'foreign intelligence
information', and its interpretations by secret courts and executive legal
memoranda, has led to unlawful practices affecting both US citizens and non-US
citizens.

• The consequences of this legal uncertainty, and lack of Fourth Amendment
protection for non-US citizens, means that no privacy rights for non-Americans
are recognized by the US authorities under FISA

• The accelerating and already widespread use of Cloud Computing further
undermines data protection for EU citizens.

•	A review of the mechanisms that have been put in place in the EU for data export to
protect EU citizens' rights shows that they actually function as loopholes.

When analysing known US surveillance programmes and related legislation from a
Fundamental Rights perspective, the legal 'grey areas' fall into two categories, which
constantly interact27:

-	a lack of legal certainty resulting in privacy invasions and other potential abuses and
malpractices inside the US, through ostensibly unintended effects on American
citizens and legal residents;

-	the intent of the US FISA (and PATRIOT) laws to acquire "foreign intelligence
information', concerning people who are not American citizens or legal residents.

2.1.	Legal gaps and uncertainties of US privacy law: implications
for US citizens and residents

2.1.1	The Third Party Doctrine and limitations to the Fourth Amendment

In two US cases in 1976 and 1979 the legal doctrine was established that for personal data
entrusted to, or necessary to use a service provided by, a "third party" such as a bank or
telephone company, there was no reasonable expectation of privacy, and therefore no
warrant was required by the Fourth Amendment, which protects privacy against
unreasonable searches without a particular warrant, issued on "probable cause" (meaning
evidence of a 50% likelihood of criminality). Consequently such business records as credit-
card transactions, bank statements, and itemized phone bills can be obtained by law

27	Forgang, Jonathan D., (2009), "The Right of the People": The NSA, the FISA Amendments Act of 2008, and
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance of Americans Overseas, Fordham Law Review, Volume 78, Issue 1, Article 6,
2009.

16

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

enforcement authorities through administrative procedures authorized by the law
enforcement agency rather than an independent judge, and no "probable cause" has to be
evidenced.

This doctrine has been subject to continuous criticism throughout the development of
mobile communications which track individuals' location, Internet services which record
website browsing and search-engine activity, and social networks in which merely the
structure and dynamics of social interaction reveal intimate28 details of private life29.
Obviously these conditions could not have been foreseen by courts in the 1970s, yet every
challenge so far to overturn the doctrine has been unsuccessful.

Such privacy concerns were increased by s.215 of the PATRIOT Act 2001, that attracted
considerable controversy. It allows security authorities to obtain "tangible" business records
from companies under a secret judicial order. Although secret non-judicial orders to obtain
"non-content" data (i.e. "metadata") were already available under a procedure called a
'National Security Letter', s.215 is applicable to any kind of "tangible" data held by a great
variety of private-sector businesses.

After the first revelations about the PRISM programme, Gen. Alexander (Director of the
NSA) confirmed over two public hearings of Congressional intelligence review committees
that the NSA collects (both domestic and international) telephone call metadata from all
major carriers and maintains a database of all such calls for five years30. By the NSA's own
account it uses this data for the sole purpose of deciding whether there is a "reasonable
articulable suspicion" of a connection to a terrorist investigation. The database is searched
for whether a candidate target telephone number is within "three hops" (i.e. when there
exists a "chain" of calls sometime over a 5 year period) to a nexus of numbers previously
associated with terrorism.

2.1.2	CDRs and the 'Relevance Test'

So far, the greatest legislative controversy in the US about Snowden's revelations is not in
fact about PRISM, but about the indiscriminate blanket collection of all telephone metadata
(CDRs - call-detail-records), which appears to exceed the terms of the PATRIOT statute.
Data can only be acquired under s.215 in the first place if it meets the standard that it
must be "relevant" to an authorised investigation. The PATRIOT Act was amended in 2006
to include the relevance standard, with the intention of limiting the collection of data31, but
it appears to have been interpreted as a justification for massive data collection.

The rationale behind this collection is therefore questionable: how is it possible to justify
collection of the entire database in the first place, on the basis of establishing that a
particular suspect's number has a 3-hop connection to terrorism? As expressed succinctly

28	Agarwal, A., Rambow, O. & Bhardwaj, N. (2009) Predicting Interests of People on Online Social Networks, CSE
2009: International Conference on Computational Science and Engineering.

29	Mislove, A., Viswanath, B., Gummadi, K.P. & Druschel, P. You are who you know: inferring user profiles in online
social networks, Proceedings of the Third ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining ACM,
2010, pp. 251-260.

30	The New York Times revealed on 1st September, from a different source than Snowden that the company AT&T
has retained records of all long-distance and international calls since 1987, and provides these records to US Drug
Enforcement Agency investigations under a secret programme codenamed HEMISPHERE. Retention of such
records in the EU, beyond the 2-year maximum specified in the Data Retention Directive 2006, would be illegal
under the e-Privacy 2002 Directive (and earlier 1998 "ISDN" Directive) requirement for such data to erased or
made anonymous when any legitimate business purpose has expired.

31	According to Rep. Sensenbrenner, Patriot Act Architect Criticizes NSA's Data Collection, NPR August 20th 2013.

17

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

by one advocate: "they were conducting suspicion-less searches to obtain the suspicion the
FISA court required to conduct searches"32.

Problems that emerged from FISA were left to the interpretation (in secret proceedings) of
the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC and the higher Review court FISCR)
whose judges are appointed solely by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. It appears
that the FISA courts agree with the government's argument that it is common in
investigations for some indefinitely large corpus of records to be considered "relevant", in
order to discover the actual evidence. Some official declassifications of the secret FISC(R)
Opinions are in progress, but have not so far explained this logical anomaly.

2.1.3.	'Direct Access' to data-centres granted for surveillance purposes?

The companies named in the PRISM slides issued prompt denials of "direct access" to their
datacentres, mentioned in the "marketing" slides that revealed PRISM's existence. Their
position was that they were simply complying with a mandatory court order, and they had
never heard of the PRISM codename (which is not surprising since this was an NSA
codeword for a Top Secret programme). Microsoft asserted that they only responded to
requests referencing specific account identifiers, and Google and Facebook denied they had
"black boxes" stationed in their networks giving "direct access". The companies are
constrained by the secrecy provisions of s.702, on pain of contempt or even espionage
charges33. Google and Microsoft are now suing the government for permission to publish a
breakdown of the number of persons affected by FISA orders.

However there is no substantive inconsistency between the carefully wordsmithed (and
apparently co-ordinated34) company denials and the reports of PRISM. The phrase "direct
access" was likely intended to distinguish this modality from "upstream" collection (see
above), not necessarily implying a literal capability to extract data without the company's
knowledge. However, such literal "direct access" is not precluded by the 702 statute, and it
may be that this has already occurred with some other companies, or may in future be
permitted by the FISC.

A critical further development resulted from a keen observation by The New York Times35
on August 8th that in the targeting procedures published on June 20th, the "selectors" used
to specify the information to be accessed under 702 could include arbitrary search terms.
This ought not to be surprising from a plain reading of the statute, but it emphasized that
Americans' (and of course non-Americans') privacy could be implicated in arbitrary trawls
through a mass of data, rather than access being confined to account identifiers judged
50% likely to be non-American. A further story disclosed36 that at the government's
request in 2011 the FISA court reversed an earlier ruling and thenceforth permitted
arbitrary search terms even if these included targeting factors characteristic of Americans.

32	https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/09/government-releases-nsa-surveillance-docs-and-previously-secret-fisa-
court

33	http://www.theguardian.com/technologv/2013/sep/11/vahoo-ceo-maver-iail-nsa-surveillance

34	The phrasing of statements from Google and Facebook have many concordances which strongly suggest they
are derived from a common text.

35.	http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/08/us/broader-sifting-of-data-abroad-is-seen-by-
nsa.html?pagewanted = 1&hp

36.	http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/federal government/report-surveillance-court-ruling-allowed-nsa-
search-of-domestic-email/2013/09/08/4d9c8bb8-18c0-11e3-80ac-96205cacb45a story.html

18

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

Thus it appears that the theoretical protections, which in law existed only for Americans,
have been very substantially undermined37 38 by successively expansive government requests
to the court.

2.1.4	Intelligence Agencies' 'Black Budget': scale and costs of US capabilities

On August 31st, The Washington Post published details from the secret ("black") budget38 of
the US intelligence community, which amounted to $50bn per annum, together with a
breakdown of expenditure into various categories. It was reported that the US had spent
$500bn on secret intelligence since 9/11. The NSA's budget is about $10bn per annum, but
it surprised commentators that the CIA's budget has rapidly grown to $15bn, exceeding
that of the NSA.

2.2.	Situation of non-US citizens and residents (non 'USPERs')

It is striking that so far in the evolution of the 'Snowden affair', domestic US political
commentary has almost exclusively referred to the rights of Americans. This is not a
rhetorical trope and is meant literally - no reciprocity ought to be assumed39 (in law or
popular discourse) which extends rights further40. The rights of non-Americans have
scarcely been mentioned in the US media41 or legislature. It is even more surprising that
careful analysis of the FISA 702 provisions clearly indicates that there exist two different
regimes of data processing and protection: one for US citizens and residents ("USPERs"),
another one without any protection whatsoever for non-US citizens and residents ("non-
USPERs").

2.2.1	The political definitions of'foreign intelligence information'

The FISA definition of "foreign intelligence information" has been amended several times to
include specific and explicit categories for e.g. money laundering, terrorism, weapons of
mass-destruction, but has always included two limbs which seem almost unlimited in
scope. When the terms are unwound it includes42:

information with respect to a foreign-based political organization or foreign territory
that relates to, and if concerning a United States person is necessary to the
conduct of the foreign affairs of the United States. [emphasis added]

This definition is of such generality that from the perspective of a non-American it appears
any data of assistance to US foreign policy is eligible, including expressly political
surveillance over ordinary lawful democratic activities.

37 Cloud, Morgan (2005), A Liberal House Divided: How the Warren Court Dismantled the Fourth Amendment, Ohio
State Journal of Criminal Law, Vol 3:33 2005.

38.	http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-securitv/black-budget-summarv-details-us-spy-networks-
successes-failures-and-obiectives/2013/08/29/7e57bb78-10ab-11e3-8cdd-bcdc09410972 story.html

39.	Corradino, Elizabeth A., (1989), Fordham Law Review, The Fourth Amendment Overseas: Is Extraterritorial
Protection of Foreign Nationals Going Too Far? Volume 57, Issue 4, Article 4, January, 1989.

40.	Cole, David, (2003), Georgetown Law: The Scholarly Commons, Are Foreign Nationals Entitled to the Same
Constitutional Rights As Citizens? 25 T. Jefferson L. Rev. 367-388.

41.	Kenneth Roth (Dir, of Human Rights Watch) 4th September 2013: "...recognize the privacy rights of non-
Americans outside the United States".

42	50 USC §1801(e)2(B) - http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/50/1801

19

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

2.2.2. Specific powers over communications of non-US persons

To end the public controversy43 over "warrantless wiretapping" of Americans, the US
Congress enacted44 the interim Protect America Act (PAA) in 2007, which amended FISA
1978, and created a new power targeted at the communications of non-US persons located
outside the territory of the US (i.e. the 95% of the rest-of-the-world). The most heated
political difficulty was over whether telecommunications companies had broken statute law
regulating the privacy of their subscribers by co-operating. Depending on the contested
legitimacy of the use of the Authorization for Use of Military Force (AUMF) to effect
surveillance, which had impinged on Americans, the companies were potentially liable for
billions of dollars of damages. The telecommunications companies and the Internet service
providers industry were adamant that complete civil immunity was their price for future co-
operation. It is here critical to underline that this controversy was about the effects on the
privacy of Americans, and that the surveillance of foreigners outside the US, through their
communications routed to or via the US, was an assumed fait accompli and national
prerogative45 46 47.

2.2.3.	The Fourth Amendment does not apply to non-USPERs outside the US

The connection between the controversy over the s.215 PATRIOT Act power and the use of
the FISA 702 power in the PRISM programme can now be explained. The database of 5
years of details of domestic and international calls was used to establish a counter-terrorist
justification (according to the "three hops" principle). A second database was then checked
of a directory the NSA maintains of telephone numbers believed to belong to Americans. If
that check indicated the number was probably not that of an American, then the contents
of that telephone call could be listened to with any further authorisation, under the FISA
702 law. Otherwise, if the number seemed probably that of an American, a further
particular warrant for the interception would have to be obtained (under a different section
of FISA), justifying the intrusion to a much higher legal standard, and with reference to the
circumstances of the individual case.

However a close reading of s.215 shows that an alternative purpose (other than a
connection to terrorism) is "to obtain foreign intelligence information not concerning a
United States person"46. From a non-US perspective this may be an important point which
has not so far featured in any of the analysis made in the US, nor is it clear how this
provision would interact with the already tangled skein of contested legality. However it is a
further illustration of US legislation which discriminates between the protections
afforded by the Constitution to US citizens, and everybody else.

Some remarkable interviews have been given by former NSA Director Gen. Hayden, in
which he stressed that "the Fourth Amendment - that prohibits unreasonable searches and
seizures and requires any warrant to be judicially sanctioned and supported by probable
cause - is not an international treaty"47, and that the US enjoys a "home field advantage" of
untrammelled access to foreign communications routed via US territory, or foreign data
stored there.

43	Bloom, Stephanie Cooper (2009), What Really Is at Stake with the FISA Amendments Act of 2008 and Ideas for
Future Surveillance Reform, Public Interest Law Journal Vol 18:269.

44	Congressional Research Service (2007), P.L. 110-55, the Protect America Act of 2007: Modifications to the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, August 23, 2007.

45	Congressional Research Service (2007), P.L. 110-55, the Protect America Act of 2007: Modifications to the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, August 23, 2007 and Congressional Research Service - Liu, Edward C.
(2013), Reauthorizattion of the FISA Amendments Act, 7-5700, R42725, January 2, 2013.

46	http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/50/1861

47	CBS News 30th June 2013; for further discussion see YOUNG (2003) Op.cit.

20

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

These statements sit uncomfortably with speeches and statements made by US State
Department officials prior to 2012 at fora including the Council of Europe's "Octopus"
conference on Cybercrime, and the annual International Conference of Privacy and Data
Protection Commissioners. These statements lauded the protections afforded by the Fourth
Amendment48, and since they were directed at an international audience to provide re-
assurance about America's respect for privacy, in retrospect they can only be construed as
deceptive49. The author publicly challenged one representative in 2012 to state
categorically that the Fourth Amendment applied to non-US persons (located outside the
US), and they fell silent.

2.2.4.	Cloud computing risks for non-US persons

The interim Protect America Act of 2007 mentioned above was set to expire shortly before
the Presidential election of 2008, and its scope was limited to interception of telephony and
Internet access providers. Candidate-in-waiting Obama gave his approval to a bipartisan
agreement to put PAA and its immunities for telecommunications companies on a
permanent basis with the FISA Amendments Act 2008, which was enacted in July 2008.

When FAA was introduced, it contained an extra three words that apparently went
unnoticed and unremarked by anyone50. By introducing "remote computing services" (a
term defined in ECPA 1986 dealing with law enforcement access to stored
communications),	the scope was	dramatically widened from Internet

communications and telephony to include Cloud computing.

Cloud computing can be defined in general terms as the distributed processing of data on
remotely located computers accessed through the Internet. From 2007 Internet industry
marketing evangelized the benefits of Cloud computing to business, governments and
policy-makers, beginning with Google and then rapidly followed by Microsoft and others,
becoming a new business software sector.

In 2012 the LIBE Committee commissioned a briefing Note on "Fighting Cybercrime and
Protecting Privacy in the Cloud" from the Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS) and
the Centre d'Etudes sur les Conflits, Liberté et Securité (CCLS), to which the author was
invited to contribute51. Sections of the Note clearly asserted that Cloud computing and
related US regulations presented an unprecedented threat to EU data sovereignty.

The Note specifically underlined52 the following:

(Cloud providers) cannot fulfil any of the privacy principles on which Safe Harbour is
founded. This was never satisfactorily resolved by the Commission before the
agreement was hastily concluded over the objections of European DPAs. As a result

48	See: Medina, M. Isabel, (2008) Indiana Law Journal, Exploring the Use of the Word "Citizen" in Writings on the
Fourth Amendment Volume 83, Issue 4, Article 14, January, 2008.

49	In U.S. Ambassador to the EU (2012), Remarks by William E Kennard, Forum Europe's 3rd Annual European
Data Protection and Privacy Conference, December 4, 2012, the assurances given regarding criminal law do not
apply to FISA, which is unmentioned, see similarly: US State Department (2012), Five Myths Regarding Privacy
and Law Enforcement Access to Personal Information in the EU and the US.

50	For discussion of RCS under ECPA see: Pell, Stephanie K. (2012), Systematic government access to private-
sector data in the United States, International Data Privacy Law, 2012, Vol. 2, No. 4.

51	Bigo Didier, Boulet Gertjan, Bowden Caspar, Carrera Sergio, Jeandesboz Julien, Scherrer Amandine (2012),
Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud, Study for the European Parliament, PE 462.509.

52	Similar strong warnings were given by Hoboken, J.V.J., Arnbak, A.M., Van Eijk, N.A.N.M (2012), Cloud
Computing in Higher Education and Research Institutions and the USA Patriot Act, IVIR, Institute for Information
Law, University of Amsterdam, November 2012 (English Translation). See also warnings of FAA incompatibility
with ECHR in 2010: LoConte, Jessica (2010), FISA Amendments Act 2008: Protecting Americans by Monitoring
International Communications--Is It Reasonable?, Pace International Law Review Online Companion 1-1-2010.

21

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

many US cloud providers advertise Safe Harbour certification with insupportable
claims that this legalizes transfers of EU data into US clouds, and since 2009 several
have altered their self-certification filings to claim the oxymoronic status of Safe-
Harbour-as-a-Processor. The Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) have
clarified that this is insufficient in their recent opinion

•	Cloud providers are transnational companies subject to conflicts of international
public law. Which law they choose to obey will be governed by the penalties
applicable and exigencies of the situation, and in practice the predominant
allegiances of the company management. So far, almost all the attention on such
conflicts has been focussed on the US PATRIOT Act, but there has been virtually no
discussion of the implications of the US Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Amendment Act of 2008. §1881a of FAA for the first time created a power of mass-
surveillance specifically targeted at the data of non-US persons located outside the
US, which applies to Cloud computing. Although all of the constituent definitions had
been defined in earlier statutes, the conjunction of all of these elements was

new.....the most significant change escaped any comment or public debate

altogether. The scope of surveillance was extended beyond interception of
communications, to include any data in public cloud computing as well. This change
occurred merely by incorporating "remote computing services" into the definition of
an "electronic communication service provider"

•	...very strong implications on EU data sovereignty and the protection of its citizens'
rights. The implications for EU Fundamental Rights flow from the definition of
"foreign intelligence information", which includes information with respect to a
foreign-based political organization or foreign territory that relates to the conduct of
the foreign affairs of the United States. In other words, it is lawful in the US to
conduct purely political surveillance on foreigners' data accessible in US Clouds. The
root problem is that cloud computing breaks the forty year old legal model for
international data transfers. The primary desideratum would be a comprehensive
international treaty guaranteeing full reciprocity of rights, but otherwise exceptions
("derogations") can be recognized in particular circumstances providing there are
safeguards appropriate to the specific situation. Cloud computing breaks the golden
rule that "the exception must not become the rule". Once data is transferred into a
Cloud, sovereignty is surrendered. In summary, it is hard to avoid the conclusion
that the EU is not addressing properly an irrevocable loss of data sovereignty, and
allowing errors made during the Safe Harbour negotiations of 2000 to be
consolidated, not corrected.

Particular attention should be given to US law that authorizes the surveillance of
Cloud data of non-US residents. The EP should ask for further enquiries into the US
FISA Amendments Act, the status of the 4th Amendment with respect to
NONUSPERS, and the USA PATRIOT Act (especially s.215).

The EP should consider amending the DP Regulation to require prominent warnings
to individual data subjects (of vulnerability to political surveillance) before EU Cloud
data is exported to US jurisdiction. No data subject should be left unaware if
sensitive data about them is exposed to a 3rd country's surveillance apparatus. The
existing derogations must be dis-applied for Cloud because of the systemic risk of
loss of data sovereignty. The EU should open new negotiations with the US for
recognition of a human right to privacy which grants Europeans equal protections in
US courts. •

•	The EU needs an industrial policy for autonomous capacity in Cloud computing. The
DG INFSO Communication of October 2012 is on this matter not in tune with the
challenges analysed in this study. A target could be that by 2020, 50% of EU public
services should be running on Cloud infrastructure solely under EU jurisdictional

22

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

control.

The study also underlined that since the SWIFT affair, an EU "High-Level Contact Group"
has been conducting talks in 2011 with the US authorities on an "Umbrella" agreement
intended to cover transfers of data for law enforcement purposes. So far, the US has been
adamant that this will not cover access to EU data from US private parties by US
authorities, and thus would exclude precisely the situation of Cloud computing53.

2.2.5.	There are no privacy rights recognised by US authorities for non-US persons under
FISA

The acquisition of foreign intelligence information under the PRISM programme requires
adherence to "minimization"54 and "targeting"55 procedures, which were revealed
(unredacted) by The Guardian on 20th June. Together these provide strong evidence that
there are no privacy rights for non-Americans recognized by the US authorities under
PRISM and related programmes. The revealed documents are heavily tautologous and
replete with bureaucratic jargon, but a close reading does not discover any
acknowledgement of rights for non-Americans whatsoever. One therefore suspects that US
operational practice places no limitations on exploiting or intruding on a non-US
person's privacy, if the broad definitions of foreign intelligence information are
met.

Moreover in a May 2012 letter to the Congressional intelligence review committees56 the
government states that:

Because NSA has already made a "foreignness" determination for these selectors-in
accordance with its FISC-approved targeting procedures, FBI's targeting role differs
from that of NSA. FBI is not required to second-guess NSA's targeting
determinations...

The versions of the targeting procedures revealed are generic, but the American Civil
Liberties Union (ACLU)57 obtained redacted copies of slides related to FBI staff training that
referred specifically to FISAAA for counter-terrorism purposes. The letter continues:

Once acquired, all communications are routed to NSA. NSA also can designate the
communications from specified selectors acquired through PRISM collection to be
"dual-routed'' to other intelligence Community elements. (emphasis added)

This means that agencies such as the CIA, amongst others of the sixteen agencies of the
US intelligence community, can receive their own streams of data to store and analyse,
which the NSA has roughly filtered for a 50% likelihood of "foreignness". No reporting on
documents from Snowden, or other commentary, has referred to this "dual-routing" or their
mission purposes.

According to the leaked "targeting procedures" (dated 2009) of FAA, an NSA database of
telephone numbers and Internet identifiers58 is used to eliminate known Americans from

53	EU-US Data Protection Non-Paper On Negotiations During 2011

54	http://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/iun/20/exhibit-a-procedures-nsa-document

55	http://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/iun/20/exhibit-a-procedures-nsa-document

56	https://www.aclu.org/files/assets/ltr to hpsci chairman rogers and ranking member ruppersberger scan.pdf
(declassified 21st Aug 2013)

57	aclu foia request (2010), Introduction to FISA Section 702, (2010), US Dept. of Justice,
decl.December 2010.

23

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

being inadvertently targeted by s.702. Analysts may only proceed to access "content data"
under the 702 power if there is more than a 50% likelihood the target is not American and
located outside the US, because the Fourth Amendment was held not to apply. Otherwise a
particular warrant must be applied for under a different section of FISA.

This shows that the "probable cause" requirement for evidence of a 50% likelihood of
criminality was converted into a 50% probability of nationality. This interpretation was first
visible in a FISA Court of Review (FISCR) decision of 2008, released briefly in redacted
form in 2010, and then apparently withdrawn from the official website (but a copy58 59 had
been kept by a transparency NGO).

The reasoning of FISCR was that foreign intelligence surveillance of targets
reasonably believed to be outside of the US qualifies for a "special needs"
exception60 to the Fourth Amendment warrant requirement. The constitutionality of
that judgement is being contested in a number of lawsuits brought by US civil liberties
organisations, because this "coin-flip" criterion implies many unconstitutional searches of
Americans' communications.

2.3.	Data export: false solutions and insufficient safeguards

In order to conclude this section, the author would like to draw the Parliament's attention
to certain difficulties with current derogations and/or safeguards proposed as solutions to
the implications for EU Citizens underlined above. This subsection aims to highlight the
loopholes and gaps in several mechanisms that have been put in place for data export. In
the author's view, these mechanisms should not be seen as guarantees for the protection
of EU citizens' rights.

2.3.1	Safe Harbour, BCRs for processors and Cloud Computing

The EU/US Safe Harbour Agreement of 2000 implemented a process for US companies to
comply with the EU Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of personal data. If a US company
makes a declaration of adherence to the Safe Harbour Principles then an EU Controller may
export data to that company (although a written contract is still required).

Sometimes described as a 'simultaneous unilateral declaration', the Agreement left
ambiguous whether it covered the situation of remote processing of data inside the US, on
instruction from Controllers inside the EU. Especially in the case of Cloud computing, such
remote processors were most unlikely to be capable of giving effect to the Safe Harbour
Principles, which, the US argued, thus became void. Did the deal still apply, for unrestricted
export of EU data for remote processing under essentially a self-regulatory framework? In
2000, the EU Commission over-ruled objections from civil society and some DPAs, to
conclude a deal.

The US negotiators in the Department of Commerce worked closely with US trade lobbies,
on a series of "FAQs" for US companies to interpret the Agreement to marginalize EU
privacy rights, building in loopholes on such questions as what counted as identifiable data,
refusing rights of access, and avoiding any duty of finality or right-of-deletion. Safe

58	This appears to be a different database, a directory, rather than the metadata controversially acquired under
s.215. It is not known how this is compiled (for example from network surveillance) or under what authority, but
evidently it is more than commercial telephone directories.

59	www.fas.org/irp/agencv/doi/fisa/fiscr082208.pdf

60	Anzalda, Matthew A. and Gannon, Jonathan W. (2010), In re Directives...: Judicial Recognition of Certain
Warrantless Foreign Intelligence Surveillance (paywall), Texas Law Review, Vol 88:1599 2010.

24

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

Harbour proved so Byzantine that no EU citizen navigated the bureaucracy to lodge a
complaint for many years.

The official EU review study61 on Safe Harbour of 2004, in a slight treatment of FISA, did
not parse the political non-USPER meanings of foreign intelligence information discussed
above, and stated that "the controversial provisions of the USA PATRIOT Act are essentially
irrelevant for Safe Harbour data flows".

Much of the legal analysis supporting the theory that Safe Harbour applies to Cloud
computing can be traced to the work of Dr. Christopher Kuner62, for many years the
organizer of a Brussels lobby of privacy officers from predominantly US multinational
companies, which became influential with the Commission and DPAs. Dr. Kuner also
represented the International Chamber of Commerce in EU discussions over data
protection, and has advised major Internet companies as clients. Kuner's textbook of Data
Protection commercial law was cited in a Microsoft-sponsored study63, arguing that Safe
Harbour sufficed for Cloud processing. The US recently re-iterated this view expressly64.

Against this background, a working group of DPAs began discussions about 2009 with
major Internet companies on a new proposed derogation which could subsume Cloud
computing. This became known as Binding Corporate Rules for data processors.

The concept was that a US (or other Third Country) Cloud service vendor could obtain a
security accreditation for an entire software platform from a reputable auditor, and
together with a "check-list" of organizational procedures drafted by WP2965, an EU
Controller could then lawfully export personal data outside the EU into the foreign-
controlled Cloud. The checklist imposed (and in limited respects strengthened) similar
conditions and wording to that which had already been created by the Commission for
"model" clauses (see below).

Perhaps in response to warnings about FISA, two months before Snowden, WP29 issued an
apparently minor "clarification", adding66 that the checklist

"only creates an information process that does not legitimate transfers per se. In
the case of a conflict of laws, one shall refer to the international treaties and
agreements applicable to such matter" [emphasis added].

It does not seem very prudent to place the burden of responsibility for such a critical
evaluation67 of conflicts of international law on a foreign corporation with strong vested
interests, that may be subject to espionage charges for compliance with EU law.

61	Dhont J., Asinari M.V.P., Poullet Y., Reidenberg J., Bygrave L. (2004), Safe Harbour Decision mplementation
Study, European Commission, Internal Market DG Contract PRS/2003/A0-7002/E/27.

62	Kuner, Christopher (2008), Membership of the US Safe Harbor Program by Data Processors. The Center For
Information Policy Leadership, Hunton & Williams LLP.

63	Hon, W. Kuan and Millard, Christopher (2012), Data Export in Cloud Computing - How Can Personal Data Be
Transferred Outside the EEA? The Cloud of Unknowing, Part 4, QMUL Cloud Legal Project: "There is some
uncertainty regarding whether the Safe Harbor framework applies to transfers to a US processor (as opposed to
controller), such as a cloud provider. The better view is that it does...". See also Walden, Ian (2011), Accessing
Data in the Cloud: The Long Arm of the Law Enforcement Agent, QMUL Cloud Legal Project, Research Paper No.
74/2011, footnote 119.

64	US Department of Commerce International Trade Administration (2013), Clarifications Regarding the U.S.-EU
Safe Harbor Framework and Cloud Computing.

65	ART29WP - Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2012), Working Document 02/2012 setting up a table with
the elements and principles to be found in Processor Binding Corporate Rules, WP 195 Adopted on 6 June 2012.

66	ART29WP - Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2013), Explanatory Document On The Processor Binding
Corporate Rules, WP 204, Adopted On 19 April 2013.

67	For relevant discussion of such conflicts see: Radsan, John A. (2007), The Unresolved Equation of Espionage
and International Law, Michigan Journal of International Law, Vol 28:595 2007.

25

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

BCRs-for-processors might sound like a variant of the existing BCRs (for
Controllers), but in actuality they are vastly more risky for Europeans' privacy.

The strategic risk to EU data sovereignty, which arises directly from the concept of BCRs-
for-processors, is that the global Cloud industry is dominated by software "platforms" from
Microsoft, Google, Amazon, and a few others. Microsoft's goal for its public-sector sales-
force from 2010 was to compete for every contract for data processing by governments68.
The cost savings for Cloud processing can be massive (sometimes one tenth the cost of
processing "on-premises" by the Controller according to industry marketing claims). The
cost savings are from equipment, overhead, operational staff (increasingly expensive for
leading cyber-security expertise), and the major Cloud providers can take advantage of
economies of scale, and higher average utilization by spreading processing loads across
time-zones globally. Therefore there is already, and will be further, a competitive
imperative to migrate European "on-premises" data to Cloud processing, and so far the EU
has almost no significant indigenous software platforms that can compete (on cost,
features, or reliability) with the leading US providers. The exception to this gloomy picture
is free and open-source software, which has produced powerful Cloud "stacks" competitive
with proprietary software and services.

In this light, BCR-for-processors can be seen as an expedient strategy both for the
Commission and for Data Protection Authorities (DPAs) who wish to maintain the
semblance of legal control over EU data, and for the Cloud providers who find the existing
EU Data Protection regime generally inconvenient, especially for tax purposes69. The
Commission promoted the legal status of the BCR-for-processors concept in the text of the
new draft Regulation70. Subsequently, national DPAs would have no alternative but to
accept their validity once issued. So far, only a few dozen of the existing Controller BCRs
have been approved71, and the standard of compliance already is not reassuring72.

2.3.2. Model Contracts

From 2001 the EU Commission drafted approved "model" clauses for inclusion in contracts
both for Controllers and Processors located outside the EU, intended to guarantee privacy
rights for individuals comparable to those they would have if the data remained inside the
EU.

The conceptual flaw in this general approach is the supposition that computer
systems can be "audited" to guarantee the three essential requirements of
information security: Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability. Whilst integrity73
and availability of data are technically and logically verifiable properties, confidentiality is
not. It is impossible to know with certainty whether either an "insider" or external
unauthorised party has seen or copied data. Even if data is encrypted with a

68	The author was Chief Privacy Adviser to Microsoft's forty National Technology Officers (in charge of government
liaison) until 2011, and received special sales training emphasizing the Cloud goal of competing for all government
business, irrespective of the sensitivity of the data. On querying whether this was a mistake, the goal was
reaffirmed.

69	Large US Internet companies tend to "forum-shop" for MS with low-tax and low-privacy regimes. If these do not
coincide, corporate attorney must draft onerously complex contracts to comply with the technicalities of "model"
contracts

70	BCRs (Art.43) are no longer categorized as a "derogation" (Art.44), see: European Commission (2012), Proposal
for a General Data Protection Regulation, 25.1.2012, COM(2012) 11 final 2012/0011.

71	A rough sample of a dozen of these companies showed that most do not provide the actual BCR terms online as
required.

72	The author filed a test complaint to the Luxembourg DPA about lack of any knowledge about BCRs by PayPal's
privacy support staff (PayPal cannot comply with the terms of the BCR if their staff are unaware even of its
existence or obligations). Despite several reminders, after one year there is still no news of the outcome of the
investigation.

73	To check integrity, a "hash function" is computed over the data which functions as a verifiable "fingerprint".

26

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

mathematically strong cipher, the algorithm implementation may have software defects, or
the key may be leaked or stolen secretly.

The revelations about PRISM dramatically illustrate the folly of this legal
stratagem. No force of law operating in civil cases on private parties can guarantee
privacy rights in the face of an adversary such as the NSA trying to breach them, and
operating lawfully in its own terms.

Clause.5(d)174 provided that the processor had to tell the EU exporter about any "legally
binding request" for data unless that was prohibited, such as a prohibition under criminal
law to preserve the confidentiality of a criminal investigation. The wording "such as" invites
a reading that national security laws a fortiori override any contractual obligation. Although
the EU retained powers to terminate the transfers, this required a basis of evidence to do
so, and thus the structural temptation for turning a blind-eye was incorporated.

Every organizational actor has an incentive to turn a blind-eye under these arrangements.
The Commission so they can maintain "high standards" of data protection are observed,
DPAs so as not to expose their technical limits and exhaust their limited resources in
expensive legal actions, Member States whose security hierarchies benefit from access to
US counter-terror information, and business in EU and the US who simply want to transact
without awkward questions of state mass-surveillance continually arising. Even EU civil
society75 seemed quiescent since ECHELON, and has mostly focussed on consumer rights76
instead of meaningfully questioning the implications for Fundamental Rights and
sovereignty in commercial data-flows to the US.

As a legal mechanism for guaranteeing rights and obtaining damages for poor
security or privacy practices, such contracts (and their "model" clauses) have
proved useless in so far as they have not given rise to litigation. In most situations
where an EU Controller might want to obtain monetary damages from a Third Country
processor/controller, the reputation damage they could suffer in the marketplace (e.g. from
a data breach becoming known) would be very unlikely to be recouped. In theory, this
disincentive would be removed by the new draft Regulations' requirement77 to notify DPAs
of data breaches, but DPAs have signalled that they will not necessarily require data
subjects to be informed (and thus effectively make the incident public knowledge), partly in
order to shield Controllers from disproportionate reputation damage. When disputes are
settled out of court without publicity, it undercuts the function that contract litigation would
perform, of informing Controllers about the reliability of those to whom they might export
data. Data subjects of course have no idea when their rights may have been infringed
under this approach.

74	Commission decision of 27 December 2001 on standard contractual clauses for the transfer of personal data to
processors established in third countries, under Directive 95/46/EC (2002/16/EC).

75	The notable exception is the Chaos Computer Club of Germany.

76	With promising exceptions such as the short-lived International Campaign Against Mass Surveillance of 2005
(website now defunct - but a copy preserved here), and the generally high level of civil society vigilance in
Germany, which must be taken as read for avoidance of repetition

77.The current breach notification requirement under the revised e-Privacy Directive only applies to
telecommunications companies and Internet Services Providers, not to information society services provided
through websites like social networks and search engines and general data Controllers.

27

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

3.	STRATEGIC OPTIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

3.1.	Reducing exposure and growing a European Cloud

As explained earlier, the mechanism of BCRs-for-processors, apparently tailor-made to
ease the flow of EU data into Third Country cloud computing, is not sufficient to safeguard
rights. It contains a loophole that condones unlawful surveillance. It is thus quite surprising
that at various stages of development, the concept has been endorsed by the Article 29
Data Protection Working Party78 (WP29), the European Data Protection Supervisor79
(EDPS), and the French Commission Nationale de l'Informatique et des Libertés (CNIL)
which led their formulation. No evidence has emerged that these DPAs understood the
structural shift of data sovereignty80 implied by Cloud computing. Rather, an unrealistic and
legalistic view has allowed the protection of EU citizens to be neglected.

Recommendations :

- Prominent notices should be displayed by every US web site offering services in the
EU to inform consent to collect data from EU citizens. The users should be made
aware that the data may be subject to surveillance (under FISA 702) by the US
government for any purpose which furthers US foreign policy. A consent
requirement will raise EU citizen awareness and favour growth of services solely
within EU jurisdiction. This will thus have economic impact on US business and
increase pressure on the US government to reach a settlement.

-	Since the other main mechanisms for data export (model contracts, Safe Harbour)
are not protective against FISA or PATRIOT, they should be revoked and re-
negotiated. In any case, the requirement above for informed consent after a
prominent warning notice should apply to any data collected, in the past or in the
future, by a public or private sector EU controller, before it can be exported to the
US for Cloud processing.

-	A full industrial policy for development of an autonomous European Cloud computing
capacity based on free/open-source software should be supported. Such a policy
would reduce US control over the high end of the Cloud e-commerce value chain
and EU online advertising markets. Currently European data is exposed to
commercial manipulation, foreign intelligence surveillance and industrial espionage.
Investments in a European Cloud will bring economic benefits as well as providing
the foundation for durable data sovereignty.

3.2.	Reinstating 'Article 42'

The published81 new Regulation omitted 'Art.42' (according to the numbering of a draft82
leaked two months before the final version), reportedly after very heavy lobbying by US

78	ART29WP - Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2012), Opinion on Cloud Computing. WP 196, Adopted
July 1st 2012

79	European Data Protection Supervisor - Hustinx, Peter (2010), Data Protection and Cloud Computing Under EU
Law. speech, Third European Cyber Security Awareness Day, BSA, European Parliament, 13 April 2010, Panel IV:
Privacy and Cloud Computing.

80	De Filippi, Primavera, and McCarthy, Smari (2012), Cloud Computing: Centralization and Data Sovereignty,
European Journal of Law and Technology 3, 2.

81	European Commission (2012), Proposal for a General Data Protection Regulation, 25.1.2012, COM(2012) 11
final 2012/0011.

82	European Commission (2011), rDraftl Proposal for a General Data Protection Regulation

28

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

interests83. Article 42 prohibits Third Countries (such as the United States and other non-EU
Member States) from accessing EU personal data where required by a non-EU court or
administrative authority without prior authorization by an EU Data Protection Authority. The
article has been described as the "anti-FISA clause".

Recommendations: The deterrent effect of 'Art.42' should be assessed before it is
reinstated, and in particular, the following issues should be addressed:

-	Even though Art.42 in principle mitigates controversial aspects of FISA, it is doubtful
that this measure would be effective, because compliance would expose the
leadership of US companies to charges of espionage. As the Yahoo CEO declared
recently: "we faced jail if we revealed NSA surveillance secrets "84.

-	The efficiency of sanctions as a compliance mechanism should also be evaluated
from the perspective of net economic gains and losses. As an illustration, the EU
competition authority prosecuted a long case against Microsoft for its monopoly of
local-area networking, resulting in a fine of $1bn (the largest ever applied by the
EU). The corporate attorney responsible for that strategy was not fired for
incompetence but promoted to a Deputy General Counsel. The reason is that
Microsoft's profits over the previous decade from the monopoly were conservatively
twenty times the size of the enormous fine, and this was foreseen by Microsoft's
legal strategists.

-	If a major Cloud provider failed to comply with Art.42, it could result in irreversible
but secret violation of the fundamental rights of millions of citizens, and the
Regulation ought to make this a serious criminal offence. At the moment, most MS
transpositions of EU 95/46 treat DP offences as minor matters, and some MS do not
implement criminal sanctions at all. That is no deterrent against a calculated
strategy to ignore EU law, weighed against the penalties applicable under US law.

-	At a general level and beyond the specific scope of Art.42, the level of fines for
infractions of the new Data Protection Regulation also need to be substantially
increased. They were reduced to a 2% fine on the revenue of a corporation, from
higher levels in leaked drafts. The example above of the Microsoft competition case
shows that some companies have enormous resources and deep strategies that
anticipate and incorporate even billion-dollar fines into their business plans. A fine
level of 20% of global revenue may be needed to persuade such corporations to
reckon seriously with Art.42 compliance.

-	Even after BULLRUN, cryptography is probably intact in theory85, however it is not
known which encryption implementations and products may have been rendered
insecure. Therefore consideration should be given to extending the scope of
'Art.42' also to cover vendors of systems/products (as well as
Controllers/Processors) in EU markets. Existing encryption security product
accreditations, especially if influenced by NSA or GCHQ, must be regarded as
suspect.

83	Washington pushed EU to dilute data protection, Financial Times 12th June 2013,

84	The Guardian 12th September 2013, http://www.theguardian.com/technologv/2013/sep/11/vahoo-ceo-maver-
jail-nsa-surveillance?CMP=twt gu

85	Otherwise the NSA would not expend so many resource to by-pass it by indirect means (unless that is a
deception plan on an immense scale)

29

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

3.3.	Whistle-Blowers' Protection and Incentives

Recommendation: Systematic protection and incentives for whistle-blowers should be
introduced in the new Regulation. Whistle-blowers should be given strong guarantees of
immunity and asylum, and awarded 25% of any fine consequently exacted86. The whistle-
blower may have to live in fear of retribution from their country for the rest of the lives,
and take precautions to avoid "rendition" (kidnapping). Ironically, US law already provides
rewards of the order of $100m for whistle-blowers exposing corruption (in the sphere of
public procurement and price-fixing)87.

3.4.	Institutional Reform

At a very early stage of consultation the EU Commission rejected the option of establishing
a new central pan-European Data Protection Authority, because this appeared
disproportionate to the requirement for Member States' subsidiarity. The option was chosen
for an evolutionary development of WP29 into the new Data Protection Board. However an
intermediate option could have been considered: the creation of a new central authority for
cases involving major Third Country data-flows.

Recommendation: a central investigative service for cases involving major Third Country
data-flows should be created. This service should be given authority and resources to
initiate complex prosecutions against transnational companies, who often employ large
legal teams to delay and appeal decisions over many years. National DPAs would retain
jurisdiction over purely national affairs, and according to the principle of subsidiarity, could
initiate their own national investigations, or refer a case to the central service.

3.5.	Data Protection Authorities and Governance

The PRISM scandal and Snowden's revelations have not been the first warnings to EU
institutions in relation to EU citizens' rights. Privacy activists for instance warned the
Commission in 2000 that the Safe Harbour Agreement contained dangerous loopholes88.
More recently, the above-mentioned note produced on Cloud Computing for the European
Parliament's LIBE Committee clearly highlighted the loopholes of FISA and their
consequences on EU citizens' rights and protection89.

The Committee even held a hearing90 for the presentation of the Note, following a session
on the EU Cybersecurity strategy on Feb 20th 2013. Afterwards MEPs asked for immediate
proposals to meet the LIBE amendment deadline91 on the Data Protection Regulation.
However, from March onwards, the level of interest in the Note declined, and there seemed
only a remote possibility that Parliament would support fundamental revisions of the DP
regulation. Thanks to the PRISM scandal and Snowden's revelations, such warnings and

86	This principle has a long history in law under the term Qui Tam.

87	http://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/oct/27/glaxosmithkline-whistleblower-wins-61m

88	The author (then as Director of FIPR) and others raised the question of whether Safe Harbour permitted
"ECHELON"-type mass-surveillance with officials but received no answer.

89	Bigo Didier, Boulet Gertjan, Bowden Caspar, Carrera Sergio, Jeandesboz Julien, Scherrer Amandine (2012),
Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud, Study for the European Parliament, PE 462.509.

90	20.2.13 European Parliament LIBE hearing on Cybercrime/Cloud Report (video from 17:08:18)

91	LIBE amendments 806/2531/2748/2950 of the new Regulation are derived from these proposals

30

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

related concerns have gained a new legitimacy. The question remains why DPAs did not
react.

In one hundred and fifty Opinions of WP29 issued since 9/11, only the first mentions the
PATRIOT Act (in a footnote), and none FISA, or even the term 'foreign intelligence'.
National DPAs92, the EDPS93, and other institutions94 seemed to be unaware of US
legislation or that PRISM was legally possible. They failed to sound the alarm for EU
citizens, despite warnings95, and of course the widely reported US scandal before 2008.
This may be because DPAs, ENISA96, and the Trust and Security Unit of DG-CONNECT97,
are ambivalent whether the "national security" exemption of EU competency means they
are - or are not - required to defend their citizens' privacy from Third Country intelligence
agencies.

In their last state-of-play comments before Snowden, the EDPS noted the above mentioned
LIBE proposed amendment for a drastic warning to data subjects before giving consent to
Cloud transfers, but rejected98 this on the grounds that it was not "technology neutral".

It appears the EU DPA institutions have some structural difficulties that need to be
addressed. In particular, DPAs clearly lack capacities in technical expertise. Only a few
dozen DPA staff (out of about two thousand across Europe) has an informatics background,
let alone a post-graduate degree related to the computer and engineering science of
privacy. There is a deeply-rooted view that because in general it is preferable to draft laws
in a technology-neutral99 way, this excuses regulators from understanding technical
matters. For example, WP29 has never conducted any survey of advanced privacy-
enhancing technologies, or issued any Opinion mandating their use, even in the face of
persistent evidence of market failure for their voluntary adoption.

Recommendations: A reform of the EU Data Protection Authorities appointment system
should be implemented. The new Regulation does not address this aspect. This is critical in
order to prevent inertia and deadlock regarding technology-specific questions. Some
options to improve the EU Data Protection governance and capacities could include:

- inclusion in the Data Protection Board of at least one special Commissioner with a
mandate prioritizing defence of citizens' rights, with a small independent staff,
perhaps directly elected by popular (but apolitical) vote at the time of European

92	With the exception of German DPAs have who been vigilant. See: Weichert, Thilo (2011), Cloud Computing and
Data Privacy, The Sedona Group Conference Working Group Series, February 2011. See also: International
Working Group on Data Protection in Telecommunications (2012), Working Paper on Cloud Computing - Privacy
and data protection issues - Sopot Memorandum. 51st meeting, 23-24 April 2012.

93	Bowden, Caspar (2012), Is EU data safe in US Clouds? (slides), Academy of European Law, Trier September
2012. Both the EDPS and Deputy were present, as well as senior officials from the Council, Commission and other
DPAs, who were emailed a copy afterwards.

94	See: 28.6.12 - Green party hearing on DP (slides) (video t=2h43m); See also:10.10.12 LIBE Interparliamentary
Forum

95	Bowden, Caspar (2011), Government Databases and Cloud Computing (slides), The Public Voice, Mexico,
October 2011.

96	On 14.6.13 ENISA Press Office replied to a question from the author to the Director, that defence against the
NSA was outside their mandate, but probably realizing this position is untenable, on 6.9.13 issued a statement
finessing the issue and incorrectly implying (footnote 21) that ENISA had warned of FISA-type risks in 2009.

97	Statement made by responsible DG-CONNECT official at Cloud security workshop 28.5.13 convened to discuss
author's warnings just before Snowden.

98	European Data Protection Supervisor (2013), Additional EDPS Comments on the Data Protection Reform
Package.

99	European Data Protection Supervisor (2011), Opinion on the Communication - "A comprehensive approach on
personal data protection in the European Union", Brussels, 14 January 2011.

31

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

elections, or by the Parliament;

-	inclusion of a special technical Commissioner, nominated from the functional
constituency of academic computer scientists specializing in privacy, and potentially
another Commissioner from the field of Surveillance Studies, also with small
independent staffs;

-	a requirement that DP Commissioners must be appointed by national Parliaments
and not the executive;

-	a minimum quota for DPAs of 25% technical staff with suitable qualifications (or
equivalent experience) with a career path100 to the most senior positions;

-	a subvention of funds to support the civil society sector, although great care must
be taken to ring-fence this allocation. Funds should be distributed fairly and on
merit, but avoiding the stifling effect of bureaucracy and the danger of institutional
capture101. In the United States, the culture of philanthropy and mass-membership
civil society supports four highly professional national NGOs102, with diverse
approaches, which litigate test cases in privacy and freedom of information, and
conduct world-class technical critique of government policies. In contrast, the EU
still has a patchwork of dozens of NGOs, who with few resources and lacking the
consistent capacity of a permanent research staff, did not campaign on FISA before
Snowden

100	DPAs object they are unable to hire or retain technical staff with current knowledge because their salaries
cannot compete with the private sector. DPA career tracks could ensure a reasonable parity of remuneration
between technical and legal staff, which would ameliorate this problem.

101	For example the EU's "No Disconnect" strategy, obliges NGOs use consultants to prepare micro-managed
formal bids, which effectively excludes small NGOs and is alienating to the spirit of civil society.

102	The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), The Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC), the American Civil
Liberties Union (ACLU), and the Center for Democracy and Technology (CDT).

32

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

CONCLUSION

As noted earlier, one of the most extraordinary aspects of the PRISM affair is that not only
have the rights of non-Americans not been discussed in the US, they were not even
discussed by the European media until well after the story first broke. The rights of non-
Americans were rarely raised, and a casual reader would not understand that the intended
target of surveillance was non-Americans, and that they had no rights at all.

It seems that the only solution which can be trusted to resolve the PRISM affair must
involve changes to the law of the US, and this should be the strategic objective of the EU.
Furthermore, the EU must examine with great care103 the precise type of treaty
instrument proposed in any future settlement with the US. Practical104 but effective
mechanisms are also needed to verify that disclosures of data to the US for justifiable law
enforcement investigations are not abused.

In assessing the impact of the revelations, three technical considerations should be borne
in mind in the search for effective responses.

(1)	Data can only be processed whilst decrypted, and thus any Cloud processor can be
secretly ordered under FISA 702 to hand over a key, or the information itself in its
decrypted state. Encryption is futile to defend against NSA accessing data processed by US
Clouds (but still useful against external adversaries such as criminal hackers). Using the
Cloud as a remote disk-drive does not provide the competitiveness and scalability benefits
of Cloud as a computation engine. There is no technical solution to the problem105.

(2)	Exposing data in bulk to remote Cloud mass-surveillance forfeits data sovereignty, so
confining data to the EU is preferable pending legal solutions. Although NSA has extensive
capabilities to target particular systems inside the EU, this is harder and riskier to do.
However basic reforms to the new Regulation are needed, otherwise in practice these two
situations will be treated as equivalent, and Cloud business will go to lowest bidder.

(3)	Although an EU-based company transacting in the US is also subject to conflicts
between EU DP and the FISA law, in practice it is less likely they will be served with such
secret orders, because the legal staff and management would be more likely to resist, and
as EU-nationals are less threatened by US espionage laws. "Clouds" can be confined to a
location, and arguments this would "balkanise106 the Internet confuses issues of censorship
with the problem of keeping data private.

* * *

The thoughts prompted in the mind of the public by the revelations of Edward Snowden
cannot be unthought. We are already living in a different society in consequence.
Everybody now knows, that the US intelligence community might know any personal secret
in electronic data sent in range of the NSA. These developments could be profoundly
destabilising for democratic societies, precluding exercise of basic political and human
rights, and creating a new form of instantaneous and coercive Panoptic power.

103	Regarding "inherent" Presidential powers without Congressional authority, see: Fein, Bruce (2007), Presidential
Authority to Gather Foreign Intelligence, Presidential Studies Quarterly, March 2007.

104	Wills Aidan and al., Parliamentary Oversight of security and Intelligence Agencies in the EU, Note for the
European Parliament, PE 453.207

105	The exotic technique of "homomorphic encryption" is sometimes proposed as a solution but has no commercial
relevance since its systematic adoption would be uncompetitive, as it would slow down processing by many orders
of magnitude

106	U.S. Commerce Department (General Counsel) - Kerry, Cameron F. (2013), Keynote Address at the German
Marshall Fund of the United States, 28th August 2013

33

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

There is a historical symmetry between the incursions on the Fourth Amendment rights of
Americans, and the disregard for the human right to privacy of everyone else in the world.
In the period leading up the US War of Independence of 1776 the British used "general
warrants" which authorised any search without suspicion, and it was resentment107 against
this power and its abuse that motivated the subsequent Fourth Amendment to the US
Constitution.

FISA 702 (aka §1881a) is a general warrant to collect data and trawl for information
related to US foreign affairs, but Americans' privacy is legally sacrosanct (albeit in theory)
unless the high legal threshold of "necessity" is met. What particularly galled the American
revolutionaries was that ten years earlier a famous case in English law108 had prohibited
such general warrants. They regarded it as hypocrisy that laws they did not write, and
could not change, protected the privacy of their rulers, but not colonial subjects. The same
principle is at stake today.

107.	https://www.eff.org/files/filenode/att/generalwarrantsmemo.pdf

108.	Entick vs. Carrington 1765

34

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

REFERENCES

•	ACLU FOIA request (2010), Introduction to FISA Section 702, (2010) Course
Information. US Department of Justice, published December 2010

•	Anzalda, Matthew A. and Gannon, Jonathan W. (2010), In re Directives Pursuant to
Section 105B of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act: Judicial Recognition of
Certain Warrantless Foreign Intelligence Surveillance (paywall), Texas Law Review,
Vol 88:1599 2010

•	ART29WP - Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2012), Opinion on Cloud
Computing, WP 196, Adopted July 1st 2012

•	ART29WP - Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2012), Working Document
02/2012 setting up a table with the elements and principles to be found in Processor
Binding Corporate Rules, WP 195 Adopted on 6 June 2012

•	ART29WP - Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2013), Explanatory Document
On The Processor Binding Corporate Rules, WP 204, Adopted On 19 April 2013

•	Bigo Didier, Boulet Gertjan, Bowden Caspar, Carrera Sergio, Jeandesboz Julien,
Scherrer Amandine (2012), Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud,
Study for the European Parliament, PE 462.509

•	Bloom, Stephanie Cooper (2009), What Really Is at Stake with the FISA
Amendments Act of 2008 and Ideas for Future Surveillance Reform, Public Interest
Law Journal Vol 18:269

•	Bowden, Caspar (2011), Government Databases and Cloud Computing (slides), The
Public Voice, Mexico, October 2011

•	Bowden, Caspar (2012), Is EU data safe in US Clouds? (slides), Academy of
European Law, Trier September 2012

•	Cloud, Morgan (2005), A Liberal House Divided: How the Warren Court Dismantled
the Fourth Amendment, Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law, Vol 3:33 2005

•	Cole, David, (2003), Georgetown Law: The Scholarly Commons, Are Foreign
Nationals Entitled to the Same Constitutional Rights As Citizens? 25 T. Jefferson L.
Rev. 367-388

•	Congressional Research Service - Bazan, Elizabeth B. (2008), The Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act: An Overview of Selected Issues, Updated July 7, 2008,
RL34279

•	Congressional Research Service - Liu, Edward C. (2013), Reauthorizattion of the
FISA Amendments Act, 7-5700, R42725, January 2, 2013

•	Congressional Research Service (2007), P.L. 110-55, the Protect America Act of
2007: Modifications to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, August 23, 2007

•	Corradino, Elizabeth A. (1989), Fordham Law Review, The Fourth Amendment
Overseas: Is Extraterritorial Protection of Foreign Nationals Going Too Far? Volume
57, Issue 4, Article 4, January, 1989

•	De Filippi, Primavera, and McCarthy, Smari (2012), Cloud Computing: Centralization
and Data Sovereignty, European Journal of Law and Technology 3, 2

•	Desai, Anuj C. (2007), Wiretapping Before the Wires: The Post Office and the Birth
of Communications Privacy, Stanford Law Review, 60 STAN L. REV. 553

•	Dhont J., Asinari M.V.P., Poullet Y., Reidenberg J., Bygrave L. (2004), Safe Harbour
Decision Implementation Study, European Commission, Internal Market DG Contract
PRS/2003/A0-7002/E/27

35

Policy Department C: Citizens' rights and Constitutional Affairs

•	Dulles, Allen Welsh (1963), The Craft of Intelligence, New York: Harper&Row.

•	European Commission (2011), fPraftl Proposal for a General Data Protection
Regulation

•	European Commission (2012), Proposal for a General Data Protection Regulation,
25.1.2012. COM(2012) 11 final 2012/0011

•	European Commissioner - Reding, Viviane (2013), Letter to the Attorney General,
Ref. Ares (2013)1935546 - 10/06/2013, Brussels, 10 June 2013

•	European Data Protection Supervisor - Hustinx, Peter (2010), Data Protection and
Cloud Computing Under EU Law, speech, Third European Cyber Security Awareness
Day, BSA, European Parliament, 13 April 2010, Panel IV: Privacy and Cloud
Computing

•	European Data Protection Supervisor (2011), Opinion on the Communication - "A
comprehensive approach on personal data protection in the European Union",
Brussels, 14 January 2011

•	European Data Protection Supervisor (2013), Additional EDPS Comments on the
Data Protection Reform Package

•	Fein, Bruce (2007), Presidential Authority to Gather Foreign Intelligence, Presidential
Studies Quarterly, March 2007

•	Forgang, Jonathan D. (2009), "The Right of the People": The NSA, the FISA
Amendments Act of 2008, and Foreign Intelligence Surveillance of Americans
Overseas, Fordham Law Review, Volume 78, Issue 1, Article 6, 2009

•	Hoboken, J.V.J., Arnbak, A.M., Van Eijk, N.A.N.M (2012), Cloud Computing in Higher
Education and Research Institutions and the USA Patriot Act, IVIR, Institute for
Information Law, University of Amsterdam, November 2012 (English Translation)

•	Hon, W. Kuan and Millard, Christopher (2012), Data Export in Cloud Computing -
How Can Personal Data Be Transferred Outside the EEA? The Cloud of Unknowing,
Part 4, QMUL Cloud Legal Project, 4 April 2012

•	Hondius, Frits W (1975), Emerging data protection in Europe. North-Holland Pub.
Co.

•	International Working Group on Data Protection in Telecommunications (2012),
Working Paper on Cloud Computing - Privacy and data protection issues - Sopot
Memorandum, 51st meeting, 23-24 April 2012

•	Kuner, Christopher, (2008), Membership of the US Safe Harbor Program by Data
Processors, The Center For Information Policy Leadership, Hunton & Williams LLP

•	LoConte, Jessica (2010), FISA Amendments Act 2008: Protecting Americans by
Monitoring International Communications--Is It Reasonable?, Pace International Law
Review Online Companion 1-1-2010

•	Medina, M. Isabel, (2008) Indiana Law Journal, Exploring the Use of the Word
"Citizen" in Writings on the Fourth Amendment Volume 83, Issue 4, Article 14,
January, 2008

•	Pell, Stephanie K. (2012), Systematic government access to private-sector data in
the United States, International Data Privacy Law, 2012, Vol. 2, No. 4

•	Radsan, John A. (2007), The Unresolved Equation of Espionage and International
Law, Michigan Journal of International Law, Vol 28:595 2007

•	Snider, Britt L. (1999): Unlucky SHAMROCK - Recollections from the Church
Committee's Investigation of NSA

•	U.S. Ambassador to the EU (2012), Remarks by William E Kennard, Forum Europe's
3rd Annual European Data Protection and Privacy Conference, December 4, 2012

36

The US surveillance programmes and their impact on EU citizens' fundamental rights

• U.S. Commerce Department (General Counsel) - Kerry, Cameron F. (2013),
Keynote Address at the German Marshall Fund of the United States, 28th August
2013

•	US Congress (2008), Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 Amendments Act
of 2008. 122 Stat. 2436, Public Law 110-261, July 10, 2008

• US Department of Commerce International Trade Administration (2013),
Clarifications Regarding the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor Framework and Cloud Computing,
December 4, 2012

•	US State Department (2012), Five Myths Regarding Privacy and Law Enforcement
Access to Personal Information in the EU and the US

•	Vandekerchkhove, Wim (2010), European whistleblower protection: tiers or tears?,
in D. Lewis (ed) A Global Approach to Public Interest Disclosure,
Cheltenham/Northampton MA, Edward Elgar, pp 15-35.

•	Walden, Ian (2011), Accessing Data in the Cloud: The Long Arm of the Law
Enforcement Agent, QMUL Cloud Legal Project, Research Paper No. 74/2011

•	Weichert, Thilo (2011), Cloud Computing and Data Privacy, The Sedona Group
Conference Working Group Series, February 2011

•	Wills Aidan, Vermeulen Mathias, Born Hans, Scheinin Martin, Wiebusch Micha,
Thornton Ashley, Parliamentary Oversight of security and Intelligence Agencies in
the EU, Note for the European Parliament, PE 453.207.

•	Young, Stewart M, (2003) Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law
Review, Verdugo in Cyberspace: Boundaries of Fourth Amendment Rights for
Foreign Nationals in Cvbercrime Cases, Volume 10, Rev. 139

37

POLICY DEPARTMENT f

CITIZENS' RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS Vi

Role

Policy departments are research units that provide specialised advice
to committees, inter-parliamentary delegations and other parliamentary bodies.

Policy Areas

Constitutional Affairs

Justice, Freedom and Security

Gender Equality

Legal and Parliamentary Affairs

Petitions

Documents

Visit the European Parliament website: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/studies

PHOTO CREDIT: ¡Stock International Inc.

CATALOGUE: BA-02-13-390-EN-C