UK TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL FVEY

8.12	A listener was chosen for further Internet profiling.^^^^^^Rgyahoo.com , a user
located in Egypt.

8.13	This user was found to have also used the following websites:

Facebook.com

Yahoo.com

Fbcdn.net

amrkhaled.net

e-arabia.com

redtube.com

Youtube.com

ratteb.com

jeeran.com

flickr.com

islamway.com

blogspot.com

8.14	This profile suggests that listeners to Internet radio stations are often users of other
Web 2.0 services, also that they use the web to get information from local or non-
western news sources, blogs or social media.

9 Recommendations for Future Work

9.1	The single-line-records can be pulled through onto BLACKHOLE to feed a suitable
QFD. Since the broadcast results are only events and not TDIs then they need to be
correlated with the bulk TDI data that is already being processed. This might benefit
Internet profiling work to understand what a user is doing on the Internet (e.g.
SAMUEL PEPYS). It could also be adapated into KARMA POLICE to go from a
specific radio station to a list of TDIs, or vice-versa.

9.2	This report gives no consideration to the understanding and processing of the
audio streams traversing the network. For radio stations that were private, or
not accessible by the Internet, this would allow GCHQ to listen to the audio
part of the protocol.

9.3	A wealth of datamining techniques could be applied on small closed groups of
individuals, to look for potential covert communications channels for hostile
intelligence agencies running agents in allied countries, terrorist cells, or
serious crime targets.

9.4	An evaluation of Internet radio for future effects operations including
information operations in Afghanistan or Iran could be considered as a way of
getting rich audio information to a large audience of Internet connected
individuals.

10. References

Strategic Framework Task 4134544, 72/09/R/001/C, ICTR

UK TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL FVEY