TDP 
Talking Point Topics Proposal

Name and Title of Tailor: l-Ir. Dietmar Chief Analysis and Production,
Cetntan Federal lntelligence Service and Br. Wilfried Chief of Collection, BND,

Accompanied by: l-Ir. Dietmar Chief Analysis Sr. Production, German Federal
Wewice hief of Station, Cerman Embassy; 

BND Liaison Officer, Washington; ?Di'~ll Representative,

Date of 1Whit: 30 1 MAY 2013

Berlin

visit Background: TD USA, Fvev] Br. 13- and Br. l?-will be attending
the Strategic Planning Conference, the goal of which is to do planning for the German
pattnership with NSA.

NTDC Topic(s}: Computer Network Defense - Germany:

TD USA, Both Cerman Ptesident Schindler, and BND Ditector, BC
_continue to exptess a desire to inctease CND engagement with the NSA. in addition,
they have alteady expanded their cyber collaboration with the Federal Office of lnfotntation
Security and Bf"v' by establishing the T4 [Cyber intelligence] organization.

TD USA, As CND continues to be the focus of much discussion with El":l
Patty Farmers, Cetntany is no exception. They continue to seek guidance and advice tegarding
their CND effort. The T4 otganiaation, although not expected to be fully staffed for almost one
year, is almost fully staffed. Df the ?#150 positions within this new organization, mote than 130
ate alteady filled and the temaining billets ate to be filled by ?hackers?, who ate still being
recruited.

TD USA, in preparation for the May visit by Dr. Maassen, Director Bf"v', Dr.
Massen?s office asked for general assessment of the Mandiant Repott and our comments
on the sttuctute and responsibilities. No answer was returned to Bf"v' as this is supposed to be a
discussion topic duting his visit. Regatding the Mandiant Report, NSA was awate of it ptior to
its release, but NSA did not tequest its public release nor conttibute to it. Notification of this
repott to our parmers was given via priorto the release of the repott.

TD USA, During a held in early Febtuary with personnel from NTDC,
FAD, SUSLAC, BND, and Bf'v', several observations wete made:

{smvei
- CND capability is unclear;
I Defense industrial Base pattnerships and how NTDC gained cooperation
was of interest to 

Derived From: NSAICSSM 1-52
Dated: 2001'0108
Declassify Dn: 20320108
TDP 

TDP SEC RETHCD FDRN

Cetutan law cutrently ptohibits from doing ?near real time? cyber defense
activities;

NTDC provided a summaty of TUTELACE and how it is utilized on the within
the .mil space, and

NTDC tequested follow on information on Germany?s unique apettures for SICINT, their
ability to consume NSA tepottingfdata, feedback on the repottingfdata being provided
and defense and national level netwotk technical infotmationfarchitectutes.

LANDMINE: The potential analytic and operational mission cost for engaging with the
Cetutans appears to be much greater than the value gained by NTDC. NSA should continue to
track the Cetmans? progtess and commitment befote investing heavily in analytic and
operational exchanges.

WAY AHEAD: 

Continue to encourage to collaborate tegarding 

Continue to assess capability for collection, analysis, andfor atu?ibution
of cyberthreat;

Continue to encourage to leverage SICINT to suppott 

Explote options for providing Lessons Leatned on cybertechnical, process, and training
topics that aid in the development of German SICINT support to CND, and

foer selected leatned discussions via a later this year. Potential
topics include: TUTELACEJDECS implementation, ESF program overview and
adminisu?ation, methodologies for building inttusion sets {Diamond I'viodel, etc.], and
lessons leatned on operationsfinttusion set development

NTDC Point of Contact: To USA, even?

19 April 2013.

TDP SEC RETHCD FDRN

