TOP SECRET

Crypt Discovery
Joint Collaboration Activity
20 January 2011

Activity Owners

I	H/nsa

Overview

Our Internet Exploitation capability is built upon our ability to effectively conduct
target development and target discovery from IP data. One target discovery strategy
is to spot patterns of Internet activity (communications, web browsing, web searching,
etc) from which analysts infer suspicious behaviour or intent. Developing Target
Detection Identifiers (TDIs), Internet presence data and other key metadata elements
are critical enablers for achieving success.

The spread of encryption, particularly Transport Layer Security (TLS), which was
previously known as Security Sockets Layer (SSL), and Internet Protocol Security
(IPSec), threatens our ability to do effective target discovery/development because
pertinent metadata events will be locked within the encrypted channels and difficult, if
not impossible, to prise out.

These activities are designed to get a sound understanding of the threat that
encryption brings to our ability to do target discovery/development as well as devising
mitigations that will (hopefully) allow our Internet Exploitation strategy to prevail.

Plan

Performing discovery within and beyond encryption will require new solutions. We
will be investigating and creating solutions in these areas:

1. Monitor the prevalence of encrypted usage within encryption technologies (https,
vpn, etc) and across the Internet and into our SIGINT targets’ domain. The
questions we would like to get into a position to answer are:

a.	What percentage of encryption are we seeing in all traffic? What is the
trend over time?

b.	What percentage of encrypted traffic is associated with a target? Trends?

c.	What percentage of targets are using TLS, IPSec, or other encryption
technologies? Trends?

d.	How are these figures above broken out across the encrypted web
services available (webmail, web searches, geo mapping, web fora, IM,
social networking, online shopping, online banking, etc)? Split out the
webmail stats per provider. Trends?

e.	What are the most common https sites visited (in all traffic)? Trends?

f.	What are the most common https sites visited by targets? What is the
profile of usage? Trends?

Derived From: NSA/CSSM 1-52
Dated: 20070108
Declassify On: 20360101

TOP SECRET