TOP SECRET

2.	Assess the threat of https to our current exploitation capabilities and to our future
intent

a.	Which of our presence and communications metadata (including TDIs] will
be lost under encrypted channels?

b.	What is the impact of this loss to our Target Discovery and Target
Development tradecraft?

c.	What is the impact of this loss to our ability to cross-correlate TDIs and run
more complex queries against our data?

3.	Understand and improve our pairing rates within an access and between access
points?

a.	What can be paired from what can be viewed?

b.	What could be paired between sites (demonstrate correlation between
collaboration environment and TICKETWINDOW sites for example)?

c.	What are the volumes of paired encrypted links and would our CA
services be able to handle these?

d.	Can we optimise our passive collection by analysing pairing rates per
country and per service level?

e.	How can the cloud enable better pairing by leveraging it’s ability to look
over time?

4.	Research new methods for maintaining an effective TD tradecraft and mitigating
the threat of encrypted http traffic.

a.	Are there other TDIs or “TDI-like” identifiers we can develop that can
identify users or machines of interest, despite our targets using https? How
effective are these? (e.g. are the TDIs persistent across sessions, do they
uniquely identify a user or machine, do we always appear in user
sessions?)

b.	Can we characterise IPSec sessions from ESP metadata analysis (e.g.
using duration, packet length, burstiness)?

c.	How can we best analyze decrypted VPN traffic to develop effective TD
tradecraft for VPNs.

d.	Can we use Internet presence or communications metadata with network
analysis techniques to identify high-value sessions? (gah: do you think this
sits better under (3) above?)

e.	Can we combine knowledge from session processing and content with
metadata to enable better methods.

Acquire an understanding for how much more challenging (or easier!) this problem is
in the Mobile Internet context, and whether any of the mitigations from (4) above lend
themselves to discovering targets behind Mobile Gateways.

2	of 3

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of lnformationAct2000andmaybe
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on



TOP SECRET