Active Operations

To successfully complete the mandatory Operational Legalities training, you must pass the assessment,
which appears in iLcam as the 5th module at the end of the Certification. And you must pass it within the
required timeframe.

Almost everyone in Operations will require Operational Legalities training, as will many people in other
MBUs.

Sec the MP-LEG e-lcaming Wiki pages for further details.

NEW July 2012

From 2nd July 2012, in accordance with MP-LEG instructions, ITScrvices will not provide new accounts
on operational Sigint systems unless successful completion of the appropriate mandatory Operational
Legalities training is recorded in iLeam.

This applies to accounts on all operational systems controlled by the ITScrvices Account Management
Team, including B3M, X-KEYSCORE, LOOKING GLASS/GOLDENEYE, BLAZING SADDLES,
MOONRAKER. TRITON.

[edit! USSID-18 training

In addition to GCHQ's Operational Legalities training, anyone requiring access to NSA’s “raw SIGINT*
tools and databases (i.e. where the data is unevaluated and unminimized) must take NSA*s USSID-18
training (OVSC 1800) and pass the associated test annually.

This used to be required every 2 years but with effect from 11 June 2011 it became an annual requirement.
If it's more than a year since you last took the training, you should retake it as soon as possible.

Further details on the Mission Policy e-lcaming Wiki page USSID-18 Training

You can check your USSID-18 record on the NS A CAS PORT 2nd party web site

Select	called "My Identity CUE"

ieditl USSID-18 & XKS

Everyone applying for a GCHQ XKS account, must have taken their USSID-SP0018 training. This is
because a GCHQ XKS account gives you default access to Menwith Hill Station COMSAT data, which
counts as a US site. This means that to get an XKS account you need to pass USSID-SP0018, even though
this is just one of about 30 data sources we put in XKS. Whilst this might sound silly, we rejected the idea
of making MHS an optional extra, because a) it's a good site with good data in it b) most people have
USSID-SP0018 anyway and c) if you don't. then it's really quite straightforward (it's an open-book,
multiple choice test) and passing it will also let you access numerous other useful tools and databases.

feditl Legal and Policy Effects Licence (LAPEL)

From Autumn 2011. Operational Leads for Effects will require a Legal and Policy Licence before they
can run Effects operations. To obtain the LAPEL, Op Leads will need to meet 2 conditions:

•	Attendance at an Effects Legal and Policy training session

•	Policy Skill 4 at level 2