[edit] Operation-specific guidance

Op DICING legal & policy guidance - March 2011 DISCOVER item 8323306 properties

Op ARCADE CONCERT legal & policy guidance - September 2011 DISCOVER item 13464646
properties

feditl Working with partners

[editl Providing advice & assistance to non-HMG entities

GCHQ's functions are set out in the Intelligence Service Act 1994 (ISA).

Our "Sigint/monitoring" function is at s3(l)(a) and we are limited as to the purposes for which we can
exercise that function. Work must meet one of GCHQ’s lawful purposes, normally national security. Any
work on EWB under ISA is permitted only to the extent that national security issues arc directly engaged.

Our "IA" function is at s3( 1 )(b) and relates to the provision of advice and assistance about cryptography
and other matters relating to the protection of information and other material. While we are not limited as
to the purposes for which that function can be exercised we are limited as to who we can provide that
advice and assistance to. Non-HMG recipients must be determined in order to receive such information.
These determinations are limited to the provision of advice and assistance under section 3( lXb)(ii) of
ISA.

The current view from the lawyers is that it depends on the source of the information/advicc. This dictates
which Intelligence Services Act function GCHQ will be acting under.

•	If we arc providing Sigint/monitoring-dcrivcd advice (i.e. CDO is monitoring the entities’
communications in some way to obtain info about a vulncrability/compromise) then w-c will be
exercising our "Sigint/monitoring" function and can do that for whoever it is necessary to do that
for but only in the interests of national security. The recipients of this advice will not need to be
determined.

•	If it is clearly IA advice we arc providing (and not monitoring communications in order to be able
to do that) then this will fall under section 3(1 Kb) of ISA, and non-HMG recipients will need to be
determined. This is where the determinations process comes into play.

•	If the advice is a mix of SIGINT and IA advice then the current policy/LA view' being developed in
response to the cyber hub work is to regard this advice as falling under section 3(1 )(a). The thinking
behind this being that it is crucial to ensure that GCHQ doesn't lose sight of the national security
imperative in its provision of “mixed” advice. Thus, following this view, “mixed” advice would fall
under section 3( 1 Xa) and w-ould not require determination but would need to be in the interests of
national security.