•	SIGINT CONTENT. It is only when you arc querying the content of communications obtained
under a s.8(4) warrant, or using a database where such content is available, such as XKEYSCQRE.
that the issue of location becomes important for legal compliance. You will still need a valid HRA
justification but you will also then need to consider what authorisation is needed for targeting
sensitive locations/nationalitics.

•	COMBINED IA & SIGINT. When querying across both LA and Sigint data sources, the analyst
must apply the SIGINT rules regarding location and nationality, regardless of w-hcre the actual data
comes from.

A QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE DISCOVER item 15356368 propertiesis available to help analysts
understand the authorisations required for sensitive targeting in relation to the different data sources used
by CDO.

[edit] Cyber defence targeting in SIGINT (content)

The aim of Cyber defence investigations is to establish whether important national (and partner) networks
have been targeted, successfully or otherwise, for information by foreign intelligence services, hacktivists
or cyber criminals. SIGINT data is often used to supplement and enhance IA data.

[edit] Attacker infrastructure targeting

In order to identify entities that have been the victim of an attack or intrusion, analysts focus on the
infrastructure used by the foreign adversary to conduct their malicious activity on the Internet.
Infrastructure selectors arc typically IP addresses, domain names and email addresses. They are the means
by which an adversary delivers an attack and communicates with and controls their implants that are used
to gain access to and derive intelligence from the computers of targets of interest.

Tailored guidance has been produced for CDO on the legal and policy position regarding targeting IP
addresses and domains for network defence purposes in SIGINT Content. This includes advice on
selecting material for examination relating to computers in the UK (and other sensitive locations) via
GCHQ databases such as XKEYSCORE or other repositories where SIGINT content is
availablc.POLICY FOR TARGETING COMPUTERS IN SENSITIVE LOCATIONS FOR NETWORK
DEFENCE DISCOVER item 15643872 properties

An accompanying FLOWCHART DISCOVER item 14360743 properties is provided to help analysts
navigate through the process.

[edit] Targeting foreign attacker infrastructure in 5-Eyes countries

Foreign CNE operators and Cyber criminals use infrastructure around the world to conduct their
malicious operations on the Internet in a way that is hard to attribute. This supporting infrastructure often
comprises computers located in 5-Eyes countries, that arc either owned or controlled by the foreign
intruder or are being used without the knowledge or consent of the legitimate owner.

The aim of targeting selectors relating to attacker infrastructure is to gain intelligence on these activities,
further map their infrastructure and identify the ‘victims' of their intelligence gathering, fraudulent or
disruptive activity. This information can then be used to defend government and critical national
infrastructure networks.

Guidance has been developed for CDO in relation to targeting UK and US-based foreign electronic