It is important that staff are aware, for any particular activity, what function they are carrying out and
under what legal authorisation - albeit in an increasingly joincd-up Mission environment, where
individuals may be in a space that overlaps across the functions. This is particularly the case for CDO,
where network defence work may cut-across the two ISA functions.

•	In CDO's case, our Sigint, network monitoring using sensors, CIDs work, forensics and malware
analysis is all carried out under ISA s3(lXa). In the majority of cases, CDO/GovCert output is
based on blended information. That is, information about the initial threat comes from our Sigint or
network monitoring capabilities and tailored advice on mitigation is added to this. This falls under
the category of ISA s3( 1 )(a). Non-HMG recipients do not need to be determined, but information
must only be shared in the interests of national security.

•	In a small number of cases, CDO/GovCert outputs will be purely IA based. For example, general
advice to regularly patch systems or based on information that has come from non-monitoring
sources c.g. open source. This falls into the category of ISA s3(l)(b). The determinations aspect
only becomes relevant when providing IA advice to non-HMG bodies. Visit these links for details
of the determinations process and determined organisations

[edit! Providing Security Advice and Assistance during the
Olympics

Certain organisations have been determined to receive GCHQ advice during the Olympics. This only
extends to the provision of IA advice by GCHQ not the provision of information derived from
monitoring. GCHQ only needs to determine the organisations if it is providing the type of advice that is
catered for under section 3(1 )(b) ISA, such as IA advice, not if the advice falls within its section 3(1 )(a)
ISA function, traditionally the SIGINT function. GCHQ cannot use the process of determination to
authorise cither monitoring or the provision of information derived from any monitoring (including
SIGINT). The full background can be found hcre:Qlympics - Providing Security Advice and Assistance to
non-HMG bodies DISCOVER item 20205546 properties

Bodies individually determined specifically with respect to the Olympics:

•	The Olympic Delivery Authority

•	ATOS Origin (The London-based part of the Organisation]

•	ATOS Origin Major Events (The Barcelona-based part of the organisation)

•	Tickctmaster

•	LOCOG

New group determination for the Games which covers: Bodies with a UK office which have been
identified by the Olympics-specific Information Assurance and Cyber Security Co-ordination Group
(IACSCG), Olympic Cyber Co-ordination Team (OCCT), CPNI or other Government body charged with
responsibility for the security of the Olympic and Paralympic Games as being important to the safety and
success of the Games between 1 May and 10 September 2012 for the provision of information security
advice and assistance.

There are a number of other organisations that have been determined, the justification for which includes,
but is not exclusive to, the 2012 Games. One such example is Transport for London. A full list of
determined organisations can be found on the CESG website.

If you need further guidance or have an entity that docs not fall under an exisiting determination, please
contact	emergencies,	arc