sufficient authorisation for other activities against the same target.

•	All relevant activities against the target will be recorded and, where necessary, authorised on the
same form.

•	COPAs will usually be authorised by nominated and trained GC8s - see List D of the “Who can
sign what“ list DISCOVER item 5233615 properties.

Datamining for targets in the UK has been abolished. You cannot now search in Sigint intercept
repositories using a term relating to an individual located in the UK unless you have a RIPA
authorisation, e.g. a s,16(3) authorisation. And if you do have one, you cannot search
retrospectively, i.e. you cannot seek to retrieve material sent before the authorisation was signed. As
a result, the concept of Datamining, as a distinct activity, against sensitive targets has been discontinued.

What doesn't change is that a full legal authorisation Is still needed to target a person located in the

UK. A COPA is not sufficient.

CDO’s nominated authorises arc listed below. You may approach others on list D if the CDO authorisers
arc not available. (NB:	longer needs to sign off this type of authorisation.)

CDO COPA authorisers

NB: Continue to run all targeting requests for US infrastructure past	We now have a

‘generic' STA reference to put in Halter Hitch and XKS to provide an audit trail for this targeting.

feditl Examining UK networks for evidence of electronic attack

The aim of this activity is to establish whether significant companies and organisations based in the UK
have been targeted, successfully or otherwise, for information by foreign intelligence services or cyber
criminals.

In order to determine whether an entity has been the target of an attack or intrusion, analysts must focus
on the ‘victim' network to search for evidence of electronic attack. There arc two aspects to this:

•	Searching for known threats on UK networks

•	Discovery of unknown threats on UK networks

feditl Searching for known threats on UK networks - ANXIOUS methodology

The “ANXIOUS methodology'' relates to creating an XKS fingerprint for the UK IP addresses of
potential victim networks in order to tag Sigint traffic relating to these networks. This traffic may then be
searched in conjunction with a signature to look for evidence of known electronic attack on these
companies' networks.

The legal and policy parameters are set out below:

•	The work must meet one of GCHQ's lawful purposes (normally National Security); you will need