SECRET//SI//NOFORN

TOPIC: (S//SI//REL TO USA, JPN) Current State of and Proposed Future Cooperation
with Japan on SIGINT-enabled Cyber Defense and the development of a Japanese
National Cyber workforce

ISSUE: (S//SI//NF) The Government of Japan (GoJ) is undertaking a historic cross-
governmental SIGINT-enabled cyber defense initiative and hopes to achieve IOC by
April, 2013. Faced with this looming self-imposed deadline, the Japanese are battling
constitutional, social, and political impediments to execution. There is considerable
friction between forward-leaning elements of the GoJ (such as the Japanese Cabinet
Intelligence Research Office (CIRO), the US DNI equivalent) and more conservative
elements in the Ministry of Defense (MOD) including the Directorate for SIGINT (DFS)
and the Internal Policy Bureau (IB). SUSLAJ believes NSA currently underestimates the
pressure the April 2013 deadline is creating for our Japanese SIGINT partners and their
resulting desire for immediate progress. The Japanese policy makers' desire for
immediate results is leading to decisions that will not likely lead to optimal long-term,
national CNO workforce development.

BACKGROUND: (S//SI//REL TO USA, JPN) Based on DIRNSA and D/DIRNSA
recommendations for improved USG-GoJ cyber cooperation, the GoJ and the Japanese
intelligence community have elevated cyber to a high priority issue. Proposals between
DFS and CIRO have advanced rapidly, occasionally generating passionate reactions from
Japanese leadership that have surprised NSA. In addition to the efforts by our cryptologic
partners there is a GoJ effort to establish a 100-person cyber defense organization, by
April 2013. The effort to create a "Japanese Cybercom" is occurring in parallel to, but not
in coordination with cooperative efforts to load CIRO or MOD J6 provided signatures as
cyber selectors at the joint NSA-DFS FORNSAT site (MALLARD). CIRO, DFS and IB
are struggling to develop signature-sharing capabilities and policy between the MOD J6,
CIRO, and cyber operators within the new Japanese "Cybercom" organization.

(S//SI//REL TO USA, JPN) DFS and CIRO are currently grappling with an array of
concerns: strategic (policy and doctrine), operational (information sharing and
workflow), and tactical (technical training) and will not have tenable solutions by April
2013. SUSLAJ is advising all parties on U.S. best practices and assesses that we are
beginning to successfully mitigate these concerns, but CIRO and the Japanese Defense
Intelligence Headquarters (JDIH), DFS' parent organization, attention remains focused
on the short term and providing the GoJ specific cyber-related deliverables by April
2013.

(S//SI//REL TO USA, JPN) SUSLAJ continues to work closely with SID, IAD, NTOC,
and FAD to develop both near-term support to and a longer term roadmap for the new
Japanese cyber initiatives. Japan provided its first 11 malware signatures to GEN
Alexander during a meeting in September with CIRO Director Mr. Kitamura. The
signatures were then passed to NTOC for analysis. Seven of the eleven signatures were

Derived From: NSA/CSSM 1-52
Dated: 20070108
Declassify On: 20370501
SECRET//SI//NOFORN

SECRET//SI//NOFORN

not contained in any NTOC repository and were immediately added to those systems in
support of cyber defense.

(S//SI//REL TO USA, JPN) Formal agreements are being coordinated to
document these efforts. SUSLAJ has presented the DFS with the U.S. Persons
Agreement (USP). DFS has agreed in principle but has suggested a few word changes,
which are being coordinated. SUSLAJ expects the agreement to be ready for signature in
mid-January 2013. The USP will enable increased information sharing. In addition, the
first NTOC developed partner cybersecurity MOU is currently being staffed within NSA
to allow for the sharing of information assurance sourced cyber data with Japan. This
document should be completed by the time DDIR visits Japan.

(S//SI//REL TO USA, JPN) Our Japanese Cryptologic partners have been extremely
responsive to SUSLAJ advice and are working diligently to increase sharing and task
their SIGINT system. Due to their short-term results oriented focus the Japanese have
not paid sufficient attention to the long-term development of a cyber-savvy workforce.
SUSLAJ has recently broached this strategic issue with CIRO, JDIH and DFS as a
subject that will need to be addressed after achieving IOC for their cyber effort. SUSLAJ
is working with ADET to ensure that the Japanese understand the proper concepts of
cyber workforce education utilizing concepts adopted by the National Initiative for
Cybersecurity Education (NICE) and the Centers of Academic Excellence in Information
Assurance (CAEs).

LANDMINES: (S//SI//NF) Avoid any perception of NSA deciding it does not want
Japan as a cyber partner. Avoid discussions of which GoJ element will have the cyber
lead post IOC, as authorities and community leadership are still being decided.

DEPUTY DIRECTOR'S ROLE: (S//SI//REL TO USA, JPN) Reassure all of the
Japanese Cryptologic partners that NSA places great value on our cryptologic
relationship and appreciates Japan's contributions. Assure them that NSA understands
and appreciates the pressure on JDIH and Japan's deadline pressures and will continue
efforts toward future cooperation taking both agencies' and governments' resources and
policies into consideration. Encourage continued intra-governmental Japanese cyber
cooperation and dialogue. Reaffirm the USG perspective that Cyber is a national concern
and that effective CND will need to involve the intelligence community, the armed
forces, critical infrastructure, and trusted telecom and technology suppliers. Provide the
NSA/NTOC signed MOU to the Japanese for their signature.

ORIGINATOR: (U//FOUO)
|, NTOC,"

SUSLAJ Chief of Operations |
14 January 2013

SECRET//SI//NOFORN