Most of GCHQ s operational data is acquired through its own operational activities: interception, CNE or
JTRIG operations. All these forms of data acquisition are authorised either by warrants, other legal
authorisations or internal approval processes.

•	The majority of GCHQ's SIGINT data is acquired under R1PA s.8(4), which authorises bulk
interception of communications links where at least one end is foreign. These arc sometimes known
as our external warrants.

•	RIPA 8(1) warrants enable line-access" to a person or premises in the UK.

•	ISA warrants permit CNE operations against computers. ISA Section 5 refers to computers in the
UK and ISA Section 7 deals with CNE operations outside the British Islands or with UK-based
CNE operations which have effect overseas.

•	Network monitoring is carried out under RIPA's Lawful Business Practice Regulations (LBPR).
Such data is acquired from private networks with the consent of the host department/ organisation.
Consent letters or some other form of agreement/contract arc used to authorise this activity, rather
than a warrant.

[edit! Other sources of data

GCHQ also has opportunities to acquire data from a variety of external collaborative sources. An internal
policy authorisation called the Data Acquisition Authorisation (DAA) was introduced in November 2010.
The purpose of the DAA is to authorise the acquisition by GCHQ of operational data sets from external
sources, where the data is personal in nature and acquisition is not otherwise authorised by warrant or
other legal or policy authorisation. Further details, including links to guidance notes and the DAA form,
arc on the DAA Wiki page.

[edit] Cyber Defence data classification & retention

The storage, retention and classification arrangements for CDO’s different data sources were reviewed in
January 2012. The CDQ data classification & retention matrix DISCOVER item 16195879 properties
summarises this information.

RIPA requires GCHQ to have arrangements to minimise retention of data. GCHQ implements this
safeguard through policy by specifying maximum periods of retention for categories of Sigint and IA
material: the policy also caters for exceptional needs. The Compliance Guide sets out GCHQ s data
retention limits.

The following retention periods for Cyber Defence data have been agreed with Mission Policy:

Data TVpe	Repository	Content retention	Metadata retention	Comment
SPAY	Gordian Knot XKS, Content Cloud	6 months	6 months - XKS definition of metadata. 2 years - RIPA definition of “communications data”  6 months - XKS definition of	IA data selected by electronic attack signature
GORDIAN  KNOT	Gordian Knot	6 months	metadata. 2 years - RIPA definition of “communications data”	Unsclectcd IA data