attacker infrastructure in SIGINT.

POLICY FOR TARGETING UK-BASED FOREIGN ELECTRONIC ATTACKER INFRASTRUCTURE
DISCOVER item 16371414 properties

POLICY FOR TARGETING US-BASED FOREIGN ELECTRONIC ATTACKER INFRASTRUCTURE
DISCOVER item 14348247 properties

Please refer all targeting of UK & US selectors in SIGINT to	for approval prior to taking

any action. This refers to cither placing a selector on cover at a front-end dictionary via SQUEAL or using
as part of a query term in a content repository e.g. XKS.

DSD, CSEC and GCSB arc currently reviewing their lcgal/policy positions in relation to targeting
attacker infrastructure based in their respective countries.

[edit! Targeting email addresses for cyber defence purposes

The underlying aim of targeting an email address differs from that of targeting an IP address or domain
name that has been compromised for use in electronic attack. In the case of a compromised IP or domain
that is hosted in a sensitive location, your target is the foreign actor who is cohabitating on the computer.

In targeting these selectors, the aim is to obtain the traffic related to the malicious activity rather than any
legitimate communications that may be present. In the case of an email address your target is the person
carrying out the attack. In targeting an email, the intention is to select the communications of an
individual or organisation. As such, location and nationality considerations apply when targeting via the
Sigint system.

•	Authorisation for the targeting of foreign selectors is achieved through GCHQ’s R1PA external
warrants and certificate. You do not need to seek any extra authorisation for most targeting of
foreign selectors. - e.g. a Russian in Russia.

•	You require a specific RIPA authorisation if you are targeting the communications of an individual
in the UK. E.g. a Russian in the UK

•	You must seek a policy authorisation if your targeting involves any sensitivities of location or
nationality. E.g. Russian in 2nd party or UK person abroad.

Targeting rules always apply to the selector that is being targeted. Sec: GCHO Compliance guide: legal
authorisation flow chart

Examining events data is less intrusive than examining the content of communications. You do not need
any extra authorisation to carry out a search on events data, regardless of location or nationality but you
must supply an HR A justification for every search.

ieditl Combined Policy Authorisation (COPA)

The new Combined Policy Authorisation (COPA) is now live for all areas of GCHQ. For full information,
please see the COPA Wiki pages. The COPA replaces Sensitive Targeting Authorisations (STA), Travel
Tracking Authorisations (TTA) and authorisations to query sensitive financial data (Finint). COPA is
required in similar circumstances to the old authorisations: primarily where the target is sensitive by
reason of 2nd Party location or 5-Eyes nationality.

The major differences are that:

• Where the target is already on a RIPA s. 16(3) authorisation, that will be taken as providing