present

•	Development of techniques to detect malicious network activity on mobile devices

•	Investigation into covert network infrastructure (this describes the activity, but you could leave out
details about whose infrastructure if this is sensitive).

[edit] Cyber Defence Tools

[edit] Development of new tools & capabilities

All systems that access, acquire or process operational data must be assessed by MP-LEG for legal and
policy compliance, and have an owner who is responsible for providing assurance that the system operates
in a legally complaint way.

(MP-LEG) works with CDOs legal and policy lead to assess new CDO tools and
capabilities. These include DONKEY KONG, ZooL, Palantir, Overlink, RT etc.

[edit] Events-only queries in XKEYSCORE

GTE have developed two events-only queries in XKS

•	HTTP Activity Events

new viewer:

Start typing HTTP Activity Events in the navigation pane and the option will appear. It runs on a subset
of HTTP Activity fields. The results table will not let you load up the underlying session data.

•	Full Log DNI Events query

To find the Full Log Events search go to ‘Search* along the top menu bar in XKS and start typing ‘events'
(without the quote marks) in the search bar at the top of the search form navigation menu. It will be the
first option listed.

These searches will only let you query on fields that arc legally classed as metadata and will not provide
you with a link to the underlying sessions behind each row in the results table. This allows you to write
broader queries than would otherwise be allowed, although naturally you must still ensure that all queries
arc justified, necessary and proportionate.

Here is the list of fields present in the results: XKS H TTP Activity Events-onlv query fields DISCOVER
item 13069754 properties

fedit] Integration of Sigint and IA data in XKEYSCORE

XKS now allows querying across a range of data sources, which include both IA and Sigint.
The IA data feeds in XKS are:

•	EAD-GK

•	EAD-SP