feditl Protecting sensitive information

[edit] SIGINT source protection

Please remember that some of the Signal Related Information (SRI) in certain SIGINT data is classified as
TOP SECRET STRAP 2 UKEO CHORDAL, including Case notation and Sigad in some cases.

If you are thinking of sharing data with a Second Party please take this into consideration. Your targeting
may be Five Eyes sharable, but some of the other information about the source may not be (some of the
data in SQUEAL XKS for example). Leave out any access related information (i.c. Case notation and
Sigad)whcn passing data to partners. If there is a specific rcquircmcnt/rcquest for this data to be shared,
speak to CDO's	ICs important to get this right to protect sources.

feditl Commercial sensitivities

Please be mindful of commercial sensitivities when discussing successful attacks on companies.

Wherever possible avoid statements about the extent and impact of such compromises and consider
whether citing the company name is necessary.

Information relating to vulnerabilities and compromises of commercial entities is sensitive as it has the
potential to unduly impact the company's commercial standing (e.g. share price, reputation), could give
advantage to competitors or to companies seeking to win security contracts.

In addition to our own detection work on UK companies, information is often given to us confidentially
and so it needs to be protected accordingly. Anything that is commercially sensitive should be protectively
marked COMMERCIAL. Please apply this descriptor to relevant RT tickets and other documentation.
Also be circumspect about information sharing outside CDO where there is no clear *nced-to know'.

[edit] Second Party integree access to UKEO material

MP-IPOL confirmed that it is standard practice for Second Party intcgrccs to have access to UKEO
material where the relevant business area deems it necessary and proportionate and/or where it will enable
the integree to be fully integrated and do their job. The equity owner should be consulted where
necessary.

feditl Training

[edit] Operational Legalities training

GCHQ's Operational Legalities training is mandatory for anyone who handles or makes decisions about
operational data. It must be re-taken every two years.

As of May 2011, all training is via iLcam and consists of a scries of linked modules with a test at the end.
There are 4 “flavours" of Certification, tailored for

•	Analysis

•	Capability Development

•	Access & Collection