to ensure that companies targeted under the banner of EWB have a clear link to the national security
piece as any work on EWB under ISA (and RIPA) is permitted only to the extent that national
security issues are directly engaged.

•	You will need to provide a justification for the entities you wish to examine, so we have this on
record in case we need to justify our activity to a Commissioner. Consult with CDO Policy lead
before undertaking any activity.

•	The UK IP addresses must NOT be referable to an individual in UK, but rather registered to a
company or organisation.

•	IP addresses MUST be recorded in HALTER HITCH (or BROAD OAK) along with the reasons for
their ‘targeting*.

•	IP addresses may form part of an XKS Fingerprint for ‘tagging’ data of interest in traffic already
collected under GCHQ 8.4 warrants. They must not be targeted on front-end SIGINT collection
systems (without further legal approval.)

•	The IPs may only be queried in XKS (or DONKEY KONG) in conjunction with additional
selection terms relating to the malicious activity i.c. NDIST Signatures. There should be NO
discovery type activity or querying of the UK IPs alone.

• The same guidance applies if we want to target one IP address vice an IP range.

[editl Promotion of UK IP addresses

Legal and policy position relating to the promotion of UK IP addresses of Defence sector and HMG
networks DISCOVER item 13408992 properties into the Internet Buffers for the purpose of improved
detection of electronic attack against these entities.

[editl MIRANDA numbers

New MIRANDA numbers came into effect in June 2011. The most recent list can be found here: Miranda
Numbers spreadsheet DISCOVER item 11840084 properties

[edit! HRA justifications

HRA justifications must clearly describe the purpose of your targeting for a non-subject matter expert.
Most system auditors won't have the same level of knowledge of your activity as you do. The
justifications must be understandable to someone outside CDO. This doesn’t mean you have to give a
lengthy description; it is about explaining in clear, concise language the reason for your activity.

Some suggestions:

•	Analysis into (Chincse/intrusion set name if sensitive/ or known foreign electronic attacker)
targeting of UK victim computer; legitimate user communications defeated.

•	Compromised IP address used by [known Russian electronic attacker); legitimate user
communications defeated

•	Malicious IP address used by unknown foreign electronic attacker; no legitimate user comms