ultimate arbiters.

feditl Discovery of network misuse

Government network monitoring is undertaken with the express consent of system controller that such
monitoring will be undertaken in the interests of national security. However, we have limited that national
security purpose to being for the detection, analysis and prevention of network-based attacks against
HMG computer systems (Source: Consent letter signed by host organisations). Support to DefMon would
be in the interests of national security, but it does not serve the more limited purpose for which express
consent was given, namely the detection etc. of network-based attack. However, advice has already been
given that some activities which do not constitute network-based attack may be reported from
HARUSPEX, provided that to do so is in the interests of national security. Examples of such activities
include serious network misconfiguration, or the re-naming of file extensions by users in order to evade
firewalls. (Source: HARUSPEX legal working aid).

The project team and legal advisers considered what would happen if in the course of the monitoring
work we discovered other material that was not relevant to national security, but nevertheless indicated
misuse or criminal activity through network misuse. Examples of network misuse might include illicit
commercial activity or the distribution of pornography. It was agreed that we would seek legal advice on a
casc-by-casc basis. If such activity poses no threat to national security and does not constitute serious
crime, then the enabling legislation, (i.e. the Intelligence Services Act 1994 and the Security Service Act
1989), might not permit GCHQ/Sccurity Service to obtain or disclose such information.

feditl Second Parties

5	Eves Policy Matrix for Sharing Cyber Security Data and Products DISCOVER item 14628328
properties

GCHO Policy Matrix for Sharing Cyber Security Data and Products with Second Parties DISCOVER
item 12961243 properties

GCHO Policy on exchange of network defence metadata with Second Parties DISCOVER item 5262362
properties

GCHQ policy on sharing Halter Hitch cA signature database with Second Parties DISCOVER item
17718071 properties

GCHO policy on sharing malware reporting & data with Second Parties DISCOVER item 17018793
properties

feditl Industry partners

Over the coming months and into 2012, CDO will host a number of Industry partners as part of a project
called “Use of Industry Tradccraft Uplift". These individuals have been selected to join the team for a
period of time to enhance existing tradccraft and capability.

The following principles should help staff understand the key legal and policy aspects of this type of
commercial partnering in the operational workspace: Industry Tradccraft Uplift - legal & policy guidance
- Sept 2011 DISCOVER item 13755932 properties