Policy mitigation

1.	When querying across both IA and Sigint data sources in XKS. the analyst must apply the Sigint
rules regarding location in his query regardless of where the actual data comes from. This is the default
position to avoid accidental error, especially with regard to selecting material for examination using IP
addresses located in the UK (RIPA s.16).

2.	If the analyst is only querying IA XKEYSCORES, then this issue does not arise as there are no such
constraints over location and nationality.

3.	However, there is the real possibility of an error when analysts arc switching between IA and Sigint
data. To reduce the likelihood of accidental searching on Sigint XKEYSCOREs for UK IPs without
consideration of their sensitivity (perhaps by analysts more familiar with IA data), it is recommended that
whenever using XKEYSCORE, analysts consider the sensitivity of their selector.

[edit] Exporting data from XKS

There is new guidance on the steps to take if you want to export data from XKS (c.g., sending metadata to
a cloud or encrypted data to PTD services). Any user wishing to export data from the system will need to
complete this form.

[edit] GATEKEEPER - Access to NSA databases

GATEKEEPER is the new NSA tool which is used to apply for, and maintain access to, many of NSA s
Databases. This means that most of the NSA databases we require access to as 2nd Parties must be
obtained via GATEKEEPER. GATEKEEPER also serves to align NSA missions with those of counterpart
organisations to facilitate the provision of NSA auditors for these accounts.

is the "Access Sponsor Staff' for CDO. Please contact ^^^^vith any requests for access to
NSA databases. Under the new GATEKEEPER set-up there is no need to organise your own auditors.

Full details on the NSA databases this covers on the GATEKEEPER (NSA) wiki

[edit] Communications Data requests

IRON HAND is used within GCHQ to manage the lifecycle of and to store Communications Data
requests. An 1RONHAND user guide is available.

A Designated Person (DP) is defined under RIPA as a person who has the authority to approve the
business case for the comms data request. When using IRONHAND, only nominated GC8s and above can
approve requests and they are only able to view/approve requests that have been made by their group/IPT.
It is valid for a DP to create a request, but a DP cannot approve their own requests.

CDO IRONHAND authorises

CDO IRONHAND requestors