 European Security,F Center to Begin Operations

FROM- USA

Chief, Operations Division, Army Operations 
Run Date: 

A new tactical SICINT producer Twill soon he up and running in Europe. On 1D

March, and MC of the Army's Intelligence and Security
Command signed the Concept of Operations for the European Security

lof'j

Center setting the stage for an April start of formal SIGINT operations in
Darmstadt, Germany. The ESC will perform SIGINT operations primarily
in support of LIS. Army Europe and the European Command, but it will also
conduct mutually beneficial, cooperative missions with various SID Product Lines.

The ESC is a fixed site facility that will provide crisis support to military
operations throughout the European Command theater, which includes not only
Europe, but also much of Africa and parts of the Middle East. Working with a
collocated INSCOM Theater SIGINT Battalion the ESC will also provide an
on-demand survey capability and deploy tailored front-end collection equipment. It
will he a complete production facility, performing collection, processing, analysis
and dissemination.

The Center will also support theater SIGINT soldiers assigned at tactical
echelons. It will serve both as a formal training center where those soldiers
routinely train and maintain technical and language skills, and as a deployment
center for soldiers who directly support contingency missions and combat
operations.

The ESC is initially staffed by SIGINT soldiers 55th Military
Intelligence Group, augmented by Army civilians and contractors. In the near term,
they will he assisted by SID augmentees who possess critical skills, with the
appropriate level oflong-term SID support to he assessed as the ESC matures.
Initially an "Army" organization, the ESC is a flexible construct that could
potentially host personnel and missions from other Services and Agencies.

The ESC is housed in two new structures [over square feet}
adjacent to an existing Army Operations SCIF that houses other Army theater
intelligence support missions, allowing an enhanced all-source effort against
theater requirements. Current ESC systems and capabilities include 59 Distributed
Common Ground Station - Army workstations, HIGHCASTLE [for voice
processing and analysis and reporting}, the TROJAN CLASSIC IOII collection,
processing, analysis and reporting system, and an Emitter Mapping suite. Planned
reconfiguration includes a "Linguarium", a novel construct to consolidate, focus
and enhance voice analyst capabilities and productivity.

FOLIO Arm Points of Contact:
Chief Operations Division, Army Operations

   
  
 
 
 

Chief, ACO Operations Field Support and European Desk Of?cer

SID Points ofContact:
ChiefTechnical Support Program Management Of?ce 

Pi?SCIF=Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility

Eof'j

3of3

