UK SECRET

DRAFT

The Digint Programme (DRAFT VERSION 0.11)

The purpose of this document to provide background for HMT and the Cabinet Office on the Security
Service's Digint Programme. [Insert security/Fol disclaimer]

Defining the Digint Programme’s challenge

Collecting and exploiting intelligence from the ‘digital footprint’ created by
investigative targets presents law enforcement and intelligence agencies with new
and developing challenges. These challenges increase when this material occurs in
high volume for multiple targets. Some of the processes for collecting and deriving
value from such material are relatively immature, others well established. There is
no doubt that the take up by investigative targets of the technologies that leave a
digital footprint provides a rich vein of intelligence that is set to grow in importance
and cannot be ignored.

The Digint Programme is a response to four specific challenges:

■	Target use of technologies that leave a ‘digital footprint’ is rapidly gaining
importance within intelligence investigations

■	At the same time, increased usage generates a vast body of information for us to
work through if we are to build a clear intelligence assessment

■	The underlying technologies and behaviours create a complex and changing
environment that demands a strong combination of agility and collaboration
between many partners if we are to become more effective and not fall behind -
and where possible increase assurance

■	Improvements in this area will only represent value for money if they support
capabilities that are complementary to and supportive of the two major
intelligence collection programmes, IMP and SigMod

Current roles and responsibilities

HMG’s response to the intelligence challenge of the Internet and Internet Protocol
(IP) networks and systems is based on close cooperation and collaboration between
the relevant agencies. The benefits to HMG are in the areas of enhanced national
security, the protection of economic well being, and the detection and prevention of
serious and organised crime. At the highest level, two disciplines must be mastered:
(1) Collection, which covers accessing information, capturing faithful representations

UK SECRET

-1 -

UK SECRET

DRAFT

of it, and making technical sense of the 1’s and 0’s and (2) Exploitation which
includes the processing, analysis and use of what has been collected.

Figure 1 - Illustration of the key disciplines required to support the development of intelligence

Collect the	Turn the information	Make the

information we want	into a usable format	information available

Provide intelligence
to desks

Assess intelligence

(1) Collection

(2) Exploitation

Investigation

To do this two generic types of material must be worked: Content (information
generated by the investigative target, such as the words in his email) and
Communications Data or ‘CD’ (information required by the communication service
provider to allow the target to use their services, such as his subscription information
via which they are able to collect payment). A further division exists between
strategic collection solutions for which the technology remains in place once
established, versus tactical solutions which are deployed temporarily to gather
intelligence on specific high priority targets via, for example, close access and/or
covert entry techniques.

(1) Collection of intelligence from the internet, internet protocol networks and
systems, and related devices

Figure 2a - Primary responsibilities

Domestic	Domestic

(tactical, based on individual targets)	(strategic)

Overseas

(strategic and tactical)

Communications
Data (CD)

Content

	Security Service		Law enforcement agencies developing requirements (e.g., SOCA, HMRC)

NTAC

UK SECRET

-2 -

UK SECRET

DRAFT

As indicated in figure 2a, the primary existing collection capabilities are cleanly
allocated between the Security Service and NTAC (domestic) and GCHQ (overseas
collection) with key gaps being filled by the law enforcement agencies and IMP.
There are also several opportunities for collaboration and sharing of key capabilities,
which become more apparent once the major programmes are overlaid, see figure
2b.

Figure 2b - Key programmes

Domestic	Domestic

(tactical, based on individual targets)	(strategic)

Overseas

(strategic and tactical)

Communications
Data (CD)

Content

Digint

Security Service

SigMod

GCHQ

This representation also illustrates the absence of overlap between the Digint, IMP
and SigMod programmes owing to the fact that each supports distinct and
complementary UK collection capabilities. However, these complementarities create
strong dependencies - for example, the Digint Programme could continue to deliver
benefits in isolation of IMP, but would fail markedly to achieve its overall assurance
objectives were it not for the NTAC and EIS capabilities that IMP is driving.

(2) Exploitation of collected intelligence

Exploitation responsibilities are allocated along similar geographic lines, as shown in
Figure 3.

UK SECRET

-3-

UK SECRET

DRAFT

Figure 3 - Key exploitation responsibilities

Origin of threat

Domestic

Overseas

National

Security

Economic

wellbeing

and

serious crime

Close partnership is essential to effective exploitation because, due to the nature of
modern communications networks, the line between ‘domestic’ and ‘international’ is
often blurred. In particular, domestic terrorists will often receive recruitment,
radicalisation, fundraising, propaganda, or even direct command and control from
overseas. Even as early as 2003, Operation OVERT found evidence of each of the
above internet uses.

Further details on the roles and responsibilities associated with the above images are
contained in the annex to this document.

The Security Service’s response

In the area of national security the Security Service is already finding that its
investigative targets use the internet, computers and smart phones extensively -
including the advanced capabilities they offer. This is particularly the case in its CT
work. Because terrorist planning can often span many countries, the internet
provides an important tool to terrorists for communication with contacts overseas. It
also offers to them apparent security benefits (although these are often perceived
rather than real). As a result, collecting and exploiting this sort of target usage of
technology offers real value to counter-terrorism both within the UK and outside. This
includes ‘upstream work’ where investigations focus on threats posed to the UK by
individuals based in foreign countries.

UK SECRET

-4 -

UK SECRET

DRAFT

The Digint Programme

The Security Service’s Digint Programme is being set up, with support from GCHQ,
SIS, and the IMP Programme to transform its ability to work with Internet and other IP
data, specifically for CT, but more generally for wider national security purposes. At
this stage, the programme has three main ambitions:

1.	Build the foundations of a strategic capability with our partners

The Digint Programme, NTAC, GCHQ and the IMP are dependent on each
other to address collectively the challenges of ‘the internet age’ and its
associated threats to national security. We have to work together if we are to
solve this difficult problem and provide the desired level of assurance.

This joint approach will also contribute value for money by avoiding
duplication of spend, sharing relevant tools and tradecraft, and focussing
investment on those parts of the intelligence apparatus best placed to deliver.
In particular:

-	GCHQ’s SigMod transformation and GCHQ and IMP’s EIS capability will
substantially enhance the breadth and depth of intelligence collected and
exploited from overseas upon which the Service will be able to draw, thereby
reducing the volume of collection for which it would need to find a tactical
collection solution.

-	GCHQ and IMP’s NTAC Programme will deliver a strategic domestic content
collection capability that will also begin to reduce the requirement on the
Service to deliver new tactical collection activities.

-	The Service’s Digint Programme focuses investment on the narrow range of
tactical collection activities that offer greatest assurance with respect to the
activities of key investigative targets, and on those exploitation activities that
will drive greatest investigative benefits with respect to UK domestic threats.

In turn, the data, tools and intelligence that results from these activities have
been shown to enhance the efficacy of the key strategic solutions already
mentioned, and will continue to do so.

2.	Solve the immediate challenge

The Security Service has already become the principal collector and exploiter
of targets’ digital footprint in the domestic space. By dint of its specific needs
and role, some of the techniques it uses are unique to the Service. But its

UK SECRET

-5-

UK SECRET

DRAFT

efforts, which have already grown significantly over the last few years are in
imbalance. It can currently collect (whether itself or through partners such as
NTAC) significantly more than it is able to exploit fully. This creates a real risk
of ‘intelligence failure’ ie from the Service being unable to access potentially
life-saving intelligence from data that it has already collected.

The Service’s primary need therefore is to develop at pace through the Digint
Programme capabilities (i.e. processes, people and technology) which will
enable it to improve investigative value from its collection investment, now
and in the future, in a way that is compatible with developments in IMP and
GCHQ.

3.	Extend coverage

Given the increasing importance of a target’s ‘digital footprint’ to
investigations, a substantial increase in coverage is required. The Service
therefore seeks to collect and exploit more material, and its target is double
what it currently collects by end FY 10/11 so as to allow coverage of all
priorities of CT investigation.

The enhanced capabilities will be targeted and specific in scope and thus will
satisfy the central legal requirements of necessity and proportionality, as well
as being cost effective. They are also well placed to address growing
evidence of threats coming from people on the peripheries of investigations,
the events on Christmas Day in Detroit being a recent example.

Successful achievement of ambitions 1 and 2 will be essential if we are to protect our
existing capabilities in the face of evolving technology and target behaviours.
Ambition 3 will need to adapt to any shift in the level of terrorist activity or the level of
assurance that the Service is required to provide.

Further details around the programme’s approach and benefits can be found in the
6th November 2010 Digint Strategy and the Digint Programme’s draft Outline
Business Case. This latter document is seeking HMT approval during March 2010.

UK SECRET

-6 -

UK SECRET

DRAFT

Annex - further description of current roles and responsibilities

■ Collection responsibilities may be further divided into five broad categories, based
principally on geography (Domestically or Internationally -focused) and scale
(Strategic or Tactical):

o	Strategic (large-scale, enduring) domestically-focused collection of
Content day to day is the responsibility of NTAC, which is accountable to
Director GCHQ. The Interception Modernisation Programme (IMP)1 is
responsible for funding NTAC’s transformation of its domestic Content
collection operations so as to be fit for purpose for the internet and IP
networks.

o	The IMP is also responsible for providing the future IP Strategic
domestically-focused collection solution for CD. At present, the
Communications Service Providers provide requested CD direct to the
agencies that need it. Determining an ‘internet-proof’ solution for CD - i.e.
one that can address the growing range of services available to internet
users while maintaining HMG capabilities to provide CD that can be used
in evidence by Law Enforcement agencies - requires legislative change
which IMP must deliver.

o Individual agencies develop and deploy methods for Tactical (small-
scale, short-term) domestically-focused collection of Content and

CD where the strategic solutions are inadequate. To date this has mainly
been by the Security Service, although others such as SOCA and HMRC
are developing requirements in this space.

o Strategic internationally-focused collection of Content and CD falls to
GCHQ. Its ‘Mastering the Internet’, ‘Better Analysis’ and ‘Support to
Military Operations’ programmes address the requirements in this space.

o Tactical internationally-focused collection of Content and CD is also
worked by GCHQ, filling gaps on a case by case basis often in
partnership with SIS and MoD.

Managed by the Home Office’s new Communications Capabilities Directorate

UK SECRET

-7-

UK SECRET

DRAFT

■ Exploitation responsibilities are divided primarily by geography and purpose. For
example, is there an overseas threat to our national security, is there a domestic
threat to the nation’s security, or are we working to secure an important criminal
conviction?

o the Security Service leads for national security purposes on exploitation of
the digital ‘footprint’ created within the UK by investigative targets. It does
this in close partnership with GCHQ which concentrates principally though
not exclusively in the exploitation of targets overseas. SIS helps fill some
niche gaps outside the UK. Close partnership is essential because, due
to the nature of modern communications networks, the line between
‘domestic’ and ‘international’ is often blurred. In particular, domestic
terrorists will often receive recruitment, radicalisation, fundraising,
propaganda, or even direct command and control from overseas. Even as
early as 2003, Operation OVERT found evidence of each of the above
internet uses.

o GCHQ (often in partnership with SIS and with occasional niche assistance
from the Security Service) leads on exploiting communications and IT
networks for the purpose of countering national security, economic well-
being and serious crime threats that originate from overseas.

o Law enforcement agencies (including SOCA and HMRC) exploit

communications in support of the detection and prevention of serious and
organised crime. They are assisted in this by GCHQ and, on occasions,
SIS for targets overseas and by NTAC for targets in the UK.

UK SECRET

-8-