Home Office

Equipment Interference

Code of Practice

Pursuant to section 71 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000

Draft for public consultation
February 2015

CONTENTS

CONTENTS......................................................................................2

1.	Introduction..............................................................................4

Definitions............................................................................4

Background.............................................................................4

Equipment interference to which this code applies......................................5

Effect of the code.....................................................................5

Basis for lawful equipment interference activity.......................................5

Application of section 5 of the 1994 Act...............................................6

2.	General rules on warrants.................................................................8

Necessity and proportionality..........................................................8

Collateral intrusion...................................................................9

Reviewing warrants.....................................................................9

General best practices.................................................................9

3.	Legally privileged and confidential information..........................................11

Overview .............................................................................11

Information subject to legal privilege: introduction..................................11

Tests to be applied when authorising equipment interference likely or intended to result

in the acquisition of knowledge of matters subject to legal privilege.................12

The use and handling of matters subject to legal privilege............................12

Confidential information..............................................................14

4.	Procedures for authorising equipment interference under section 5........................16

General basis for lawful activity.....................................................16

Application for an equipment interference warrant.....................................16

Issuing of section 5 warrants.........................................................17

Urgent authorisation of a section 5 warrant...........................................17

Renewals of warrants..................................................................18

Cancellations of warrants.............................................................18

Retrieval of equipment................................................................18

5.	Keeping of records.......................................................................19

Centrally retrievable records of warrants.............................................19

6.	Handling of information and safeguards...................................................20

Overview..............................................................................20

Use of information as evidence........................................................20

Handling information obtained by equipment interference...............................20

Dissemination of information..........................................................21

Copying...............................................................................21

Storage.............................................................................. 21

Destruction...........................................................................21

Personnel security .................................................................. 21

7.	Application of the code to equipment interference pursuant to section 7 of the 1994 Act.. 23

Application of the code to other equipment interference...............................23

General basis for lawful activity.....................................................23

Authorisations for equipment interference under section 7.............................24

Urgent authorisation of a section 7 authorisation.....................................24

Other authorisations and internal approvals ......................................... 24

Renewals of authorisations............................................................25

Cancellations of authorisations.......................................................25

2

8.	Oversight	by Intelligence Services Commissioner.....................................26

9.	Complaints..........................................................................27

10.	Glossary............................................................................28

11.	Annex A.............................................................................30

3

1.	Introduction

Definitions

In this code:

•	“1989

•	“1994

•	“1998

•	“2000
• terms

Act” means the Security Service Act 1989;

Act” means the Intelligence Services Act 1994;

Act” means the Human Rights Act 1998;

Act” means the Regulation of Investigatory Powers
in italics (at first use) are defined in the Glossary at

Act 2000;

the end of this code.

Background

1.1	This code of practice provides guidance on the use by the Intelligence Services of

section 5 of the Intelligence Services Act 1994 to authorise equipment interference to
which the code applies. It provides guidance on the procedures that must be followed
before equipment interference can take place under that provision, and on the
processing, retention, destruction and disclosure of any information obtained by means
of the interference.

1.2	This code is issued pursuant to section 71 of the 2000 Act, which provides that the
Secretary of State shall issue one or more codes of practice in relation to the powers and
duties in section 5 of the 1994 Act. To the extent that the guidance provided by this code
with respect to equipment interference under section 5 of the 1994 Act overlaps with the
guidance provided by the Covert Surveillance and Property Interference Revised Code of
Practice issued in 2014, this code takes precedence. The Intelligence Services must
continue to comply with the 2014 Code in all other respects.

1.3	The heads of the Intelligence Services are also under a duty to ensure that arrangements
are in force to secure: (i) that no information is obtained by the Intelligence Services
except so far as necessary for the proper discharge of their functions1; and (ii) that no
information is disclosed except so far as is necessary for those functions, for the purpose
of any criminal proceedings, and, in the case of the Secret Intelligence Service ("SIS”)
and the Security Service, for the other purposes specified1 2. The arrangements must
include provision with respect to the disclosure of information obtained by virtue of
sections 5 and 7, and any information so obtained must be subject to the arrangements3.

1.4	There is no power for the Secretary of State to issue codes of practice in relation to the
powers and duties in section 7 of the 1994 Act. However, SIS and the Government
Communications Headquarters ("GCHQ”) must as a matter of policy (and without
prejudice as to whether section 6 of the 1998 Act applies) comply with the provisions of
this code in any case where equipment interference is to be, or has been, authorised
pursuant to section 7 of the 1994 Act in relation to equipment located outside the British
Islands4.

1

See paragraph 1.9.

2	See section 2(2)(a) of the 1989 Act and sections 2(2)(a) and 4(2)(a) of the 1994 Act.

3	See sections 5(2)(c) and 7(3)(c) of the 1994 Act.

4	Applications for authorisations under section 7 may only be made by SIS and GCHQ.

4

1.5	This code is publicly available and should be readily accessible by members of any of the
Intelligence Services seeking to use the 1994 Act to authorise equipment interference to
which this code applies.

Equipment interference to which this code applies

cr

1.6	This code applies to (i) any interference5 (whether remotely or otherwise) by the
Intelligence Services, or persons acting on their behalf or in their support, with
equipment6 producing electromagnetic, acoustic and other emissions, and (ii) information
derived from any such interference, which is to be authorised under section 5 of the 1994
Act, in order to do any or all of the following:

a)	obtain information from the equipment in pursuit of intelligence requirements;

b)	obtain information concerning the ownership, nature and use of the equipment in
pursuit of intelligence requirements;

c)	locate and examine, remove, modify or substitute equipment hardware or software
which is capable of yielding information of the type described in a) and b);

d)	enable and facilitate surveillance activity by means of the equipment.

"Information” may include communications content, and communications data as defined
in section 21 of the 2000 Act.

1.7	The section 5 warrant process must be complied with in order properly and effectively to
deal with any risk of civil or criminal liability arising from the interferences with equipment
specified at sub-paragraphs (a) to (d) of paragraph 1.6 above. A section 5 warrant
provides the Intelligence Services with specific legal authorisation removing criminal and
civil liability arising from any such interferences. For the purposes of this code, any
activity by the Intelligence Services or persons acting on their behalf or in their support
falling within paragraph 1.6 which is (or is to be) authorised under section 5 of the 1994
Act will be referred to as equipment interference.

Effect of the code

1.8	The 2000 Act provides that all codes of practice in force under section 71 of the 2000 Act
are admissible as evidence in criminal and civil proceedings. If any provision of this code
appears relevant to any court or tribunal considering any such proceedings, or to the
Investigatory Powers Tribunal established under the 2000 Act, or to one of the
Commissioners carrying out any of their functions under the 2000 Act, it must be taken
into account. The Intelligence Services may also be required to justify, with regard to this
code, the use of section 5 warrants in general or the failure to apply for or use such
warrants where appropriate.

Basis for lawful equipment interference activity

1.9	Equipment interference is conducted in accordance with the statutory functions of each
Intelligence Service:

• In the case of the Security Service, the 1989 Act provides that the Service’s functions
are the protection of national security, the safeguarding of the economic well-being of

5

“Interference” for these purposes excludes any interference which takes place with the consent of a person
having the right to control the operation or the use of the equipment.

6	“Equipment” may include, but is not limited to, computers, servers, routers, laptops, mobile phones and other
devices.

5

the United Kingdom against threats posed by the actions or intentions of persons
outside the British Islands and the provision of support to the police and other law
enforcement authorities in the prevention and detection of serious crime;

•	For SIS, the 1994 Act provides that its functions are to obtain and provide information
relating to the actions or intentions of persons outside the British Islands and to
perform other tasks relating to the actions or intentions of such persons in the
interests of national security, with particular reference to the defence and foreign
policies of Her Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom, or in the interests of the
economic well-being of the United Kingdom or in support of the prevention or
detection of serious crime;

•	In the case of GCHQ, the 1994 Act provides, as relevant, that its functions are to
monitor or interfere with electromagnetic, acoustic and other emissions and any
equipment producing such emissions and to obtain and provide information derived
from or related to such emissions or equipment and from encrypted material in the
interests of national security, with particular reference to the defence and foreign
policies of Her Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom, or in the interests of the
economic well-being of the United Kingdom in relation to the actions or intentions of
persons outside the British Islands, or in support of the prevention or detection of
serious crime.

1.10	The Human Rights Act 1998 gives effect in UK law to the rights set out in the European
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). Some of these rights are absolute, such as the
prohibition on torture, while others are qualified, which means that it is permissible for
public authorities to interfere with those rights if certain conditions are satisfied.

1.11	Amongst the qualified rights is a person’s right to respect for their private and family life,
home and correspondence, as provided for by Article 8 of the ECHr. It is Article 8 that is
most likely to be engaged when the Intelligence Services seek to obtain personal
information about a person by means of equipment interference. Such conduct may also
engage Article 1 of the First Protocol (right to peaceful enjoyment of possessions7).

1.12	By section 6(1) of the 1998 Act, it is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which is
incompatible with a Convention right. Each of the Intelligence Services is a public
authority for this purpose. When undertaking any activity that interferes with ECHR rights,
the Intelligence Services must therefore (among other things) act proportionately.

Section 5 of the 1994 Act provides a statutory framework under which equipment
interference can be authorised and conducted compatibly with ECHR rights.

1.13	So far as any information obtained by means of an equipment interference warrant is
concerned, the heads of each of the Intelligence Services must also ensure that there
are satisfactory arrangements in force under the 1994 Act or the 1989 Act in respect of
the disclosure of that information, and that any information obtained under the warrant
will be subject to those arrangements. Compliance with these arrangements will ensure
that the Intelligence Services remain within the law and properly discharge their
functions.

Application of section 5 of the 1994 Act

1.14	The 1994 Act applies to each of the Intelligence Services in a slightly different way:

7	For example, hardware or software.

6

•	SIS and GCHQ may not be issued with a section 5 warrant for action in support of the
prevention or detection of serious crime which relates to equipment in the British
Islands8;

•	The Security Service may only be issued with a section 5 warrant for action in support
of the prevention or detection of serious crime which relates to equipment in the
British Islands if certain conditions are satisfied9.

1.15	The procedures for authorising equipment interference under section 5 (and any
associated interferences) are explained further in chapter 4.

8	See section 5(3) of the 1994 Act.

9	See section 5(3B) of the 1994 Act.

7

2.	General rules on warrants

Overview

2.1	A warrant under section 5 of the 1994 Act will, providing the statutory tests are met,
remove criminal and civil liability arising from equipment interference operations.

2.2	Responsibility for issuing warrants under section 5 rests with the Secretary of State.
Applications for warrants may be made by any of the Intelligence Services.

2.3	In any case where an equipment interference operation also enables or facilitates
separate covert surveillance likely to result in the obtaining of private information about a
person, a directed or intrusive surveillance authorisation may be required under Part 2 of
the 2000 Act (see the Covert Surveillance and Property Interference Code of Practice).

Necessity and proportionality

2.4	The 1994 Act provides that the Secretary of State issuing the warrant must believe that
the activities to be authorised are necessary for one or more statutory purposes10.

2.5	If the activities are deemed necessary for any of the purposes specified, the Secretary of
State must also believe that they are proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by
carrying them out.

2.6	Any assessment of proportionality involves balancing the seriousness of the intrusion into
the privacy or property of the subject of the operation (or any other person who may be
affected) against the need for the activity in investigative, operational or capability terms.
The warrant will not be proportionate if it is excessive in the overall circumstances of the
case. Each action authorised should bring an expected benefit to the investigation or
operation and should not be disproportionate or arbitrary. The fact that there is a
potential threat to national security (for example) may not alone render the most intrusive
actions proportionate. No interference should be considered proportionate if the
information which is sought could reasonably be obtained by other less intrusive means.

2.7	The following elements of proportionality should therefore be considered:

•	balancing the size and scope of the proposed interference against what is sought to
be achieved;

•	explaining how and why the methods to be adopted will cause the least possible
intrusion on the subject and others;

•	considering whether the activity is an appropriate use of the legislation and a
reasonable way, having considered all reasonable alternatives, of obtaining the
necessary result;

•	evidencing, as far as reasonably practicable, what other methods have been
considered and why they were not implemented.

2.8	It is important that all those involved in undertaking equipment interference operations
under the 1994 Act are fully aware of the extent and limits of the action that may be taken
under the warrant in question.

10

These statutory purposes are specified in section 5 of the 1994 Act. They are detailed in Chapter 4.

8

Collateral intrusion

2.9	Any application for a section 5 warrant should also take into account the risk of obtaining
private information about persons who are not subjects of the equipment interference
activity (collateral intrusion).

2.10	Measures should be taken, wherever practicable, to avoid or minimise unnecessary
intrusion into the privacy of those who are not the intended subjects of the equipment
interference activity. Where such collateral intrusion is unavoidable, the activities may still
be authorised, provided this intrusion is considered proportionate to what is sought to be
achieved.

2.11	All applications should therefore include an assessment of the risk of collateral intrusion
and details of any measures taken to limit this, to enable the Secretary of State fully to
consider the proportionality of the proposed actions.

2.12	Where it is proposed to conduct equipment interference activity specifically against
individuals who are not intelligence targets in their own right, interference with the
equipment of such individuals should not be considered as collateral intrusion but rather
as intended intrusion. Any such equipment interference activity should be carefully
considered against the necessity and proportionality criteria as described above.

Reviewing warrants

2.13	Regular reviews of all warrants should be undertaken to assess the need for the
equipment interference activity to continue. The results of a review should be retained for
at least three years (see Chapter 5). Particular attention should be given to the need to
review warrants frequently where the equipment interference involves a high level of
intrusion into private life or significant collateral intrusion, or confidential information is
likely to be obtained.

2.14	In each case, unless specified by the Secretary of State, the frequency of reviews should
be determined by the member of the Intelligence Services who made the application.

This should be as frequently as is considered necessary and practicable.

2.15	In the event that there are any significant and substantive changes to the nature of the
interference and/or the identity of the equipment during the currency of the warrant, the
Intelligence Services should consider whether it is necessary to apply for a fresh section
5 warrant.

General best practices

2.16	The following guidelines should be considered as best working practices by the
Intelligence Services with regard to all applications for warrants covered by this code:

•	applications should avoid any repetition of information;

•	information contained in applications should be limited to that required by the 1994
Act;

•	where warrants are issued under urgency procedures (see Chapter 4), a record
detailing the actions authorised and the reasons why the urgency procedures were
used should be recorded by the applicant and authorising officer as a priority. There
is then no requirement subsequently to submit a full written application;

9

•	where it is foreseen that other agencies will be involved in carrying out the operation,
these agencies should be detailed in the application; and

•	warrants should not generally be sought for activities already authorised following an
application by the same or a different public authority.

2.17	Furthermore, it is considered good practice that within each of the Intelligence Services,

a designated senior official should be responsible for:

•	the integrity of the process in place within the Intelligence Service to authorise
equipment interference;

•	compliance with the 1994 Act and this code;

•	engagement with the Intelligence Services Commissioner when he conducts his
inspections; and

•	where necessary, overseeing the implementation of any post inspection action plans
recommended or approved by the Commissioner.

10

3.	Legally privileged and confidential
information

Overview

3.1	The 1994 Act does not provide any special protection for 'confidential information'.
Nevertheless, particular consideration should be given in cases where the subject of the
operation might reasonably assume a high degree of privacy, or where confidential
information is involved. Confidential information includes communications subject to legal
privilege, communications between a Member of Parliament and another person on
constituency business, confidential personal information, or confidential journalistic
material. So, for example, particular consideration should be given where, through
equipment interference comprising the obtaining of information, it is likely that knowledge
will be acquired of communications between a minister of religion and an individual
relating to the latter's spiritual welfare, or between a Member of Parliament and a
constituent relating to constituency business, or wherever matters of medical or
journalistic confidentiality or legal privilege may be involved. References to a Member of
Parliament include references to a Member of the UK Parliament, the European
Parliament, the Scottish Parliament, the Welsh Assembly and the Northern Ireland
Assembly.

Information subject to legal privilege: introduction

3.2	Section 98 of the Police Act 1997 describes those matters that are subject to legal
privilege in England and Wales. In relation to Scotland, those matters subject to legal
privilege contained in section 33 of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995
should be adopted. With regard to Northern Ireland, Article 12 of the Police and Criminal
Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 should be referred to.

3.3	Legal privilege does not apply to communications or items held with the intention of
furthering a criminal purpose (whether the lawyer is acting unwittingly or culpably).

Legally privileged communications or items will lose their protection if there are grounds
to believe, for example, that the professional legal adviser is intending to hold or use the
information for a criminal purpose. But privilege is not lost if a professional legal adviser
is properly advising a person who is suspected of having committed a criminal offence.
The concept of legal privilege applies to the provision of professional legal advice by any
individual, agency or organisation qualified to do so.

3.4	Although the 1994 Act does not provide any special protection for legally privileged
material, the acquisition of knowledge of matters subject to legal privilege is particularly
sensitive and may give rise to issues under Article 6 (right to a fair trial) of the ECHR as
well as engaging Article 8. The acquisition of knowledge of matters subject to legal
privilege is therefore subject to additional safeguards under this code.

11

Tests to be applied when authorising equipment interference likely
or intended to result in the acquisition of knowledge of matters
subject to legal privilege

3.5	All applications for equipment interference that may result in the acquisition of knowledge
of matters subject to legal privilege should state whether the interference is intended to
obtain knowledge of matters subject to legal privilege (as described in paragraph 3.2).

3.6	If the equipment interference is not intended to result in the acquisition of knowledge of
matters subject to legal privilege, but it is likely that such knowledge will nevertheless be
acquired during the operation, the application should identify the steps which will be
taken to mitigate the risk of acquiring it. If the risk cannot be removed entirely, the
application should explain what steps will be taken to ensure that any knowledge of
matters subject to legal privilege which is obtained is not used in law enforcement
investigations or criminal prosecutions.

3.7	Where equipment interference is likely or intended to result in the acquisition of
knowledge of matters subject to legal privilege, a warrant will only be issued if the
Secretary of State is satisfied that there are exceptional and compelling circumstances
that make the warrant necessary:

•	Where the equipment interference is not intended to result in the acquisition of
knowledge of matters subject to legal privilege, such exceptional and compelling
circumstances may arise in the interests of national security or the economic well-
being of the UK, or for the purpose of preventing or detecting serious crime;

•	Where the equipment interference is intended to result in the acquisition of knowledge
of matters subject to legal privilege, such circumstances will arise only in a very
restricted range of cases, such as where there is a threat to life or limb, or to national
security, and the equipment interference is reasonably regarded as likely to yield
intelligence necessary to counter the threat.

3.8	Further, in considering any equipment interference likely or intended to result in the
acquisition of knowledge of matters subject to legal privilege, the Secretary of State must
be satisfied that the proposed equipment interference is proportionate to what is sought
to be achieved.

The use and handling of matters subject to legal privilege

3.9	Matters subject to legal privilege are particularly sensitive and equipment interference
which acquires such material may give rise to issues under Article 6 of the ECHR as well
as engaging Article 8.

3.10	Where the Intelligence Services deliberately acquire knowledge of matters subject to
legal privilege, they may use that knowledge to counter the threat which led them to
acquire it, but it will not be admissible in court. The Intelligence Services should ensure
that knowledge of matters subject to legal privilege, whether or not it is acquired
deliberately, is kept separate from law enforcement investigations or criminal
prosecutions.

3.11	In cases likely to result in the acquisition of knowledge of matters subject to legal
privilege, the Secretary of State may require regular reporting so as to be able to decide
whether the warrant should continue to have effect.

12

3.12	Where there is a renewal application in respect of a warrant which has resulted in the
obtaining of legally privileged material that fact ought to be highlighted in the renewal
application.

3.13	A substantial proportion of the communications between a lawyer and his client(s) may
be subject to legal privilege. Therefore, in any case where a lawyer is the subject of an
investigation or operation, the Secretary of State should consider whether the special
safeguards outlined in this chapter apply. The case should also be notified to the
Intelligence Services Commissioner during his next inspection and any legally privileged
material which has been retained from any such investigation or operation should be
made available to the Commissioner on request.

3.14	Caseworkers who examine information obtained by equipment interference should be
alert to any material which may be subject to legal privilege. Where there is doubt as to
whether the information is subject to legal privilege, or as to the handling and
dissemination of such information, advice should be sought from a legal adviser within
the relevant Intelligence Service. Similar advice should also be sought where there is
doubt over whether information is not subject to legal privilege due to the "in furtherance
of a criminal purpose" exception.

3.15	Other than in exceptional circumstances, no information subject to legal privilege must be
acted on or further disseminated unless a legal adviser has been consulted on the
lawfulness (including the necessity and proportionality) of such action or dissemination.

3.16	The retention of legally privileged material, or its dissemination to an outside body,
should be accompanied by a clear warning that it is subject to legal privilege. It should be
safeguarded by taking reasonable steps to remove the risk of it becoming available, or its
contents becoming known, to any person whose possession of it might prejudice any
criminal or civil proceedings to which the information relates. Neither the Crown
Prosecution Service lawyer nor any other prosecuting authority lawyer with conduct of a
prosecution should have sight of any legally privileged material, held by the relevant
Intelligence Service, with any possible connection to the proceedings. In respect of civil
proceedings, there can be no circumstances under which it is proper for any of the
Intelligence Services to seek to rely on legally privileged material in order to gain a
litigation advantage over another party in legal proceedings.

3.17	In order to safeguard against any risk of prejudice or accusation of abuse of process, the
Intelligence Services must also take all reasonable steps to ensure that (as far as
practicable) lawyers or policy officials with conduct of legal proceedings should not see
legally privileged material relating to those proceedings (whether the privilege is that of
the other party to those proceedings or that of a third party). If such circumstances do
arise, the relevant Intelligence Service must seek independent advice from Counsel and,
if there is assessed to be a risk that such material could yield a litigation advantage, the
direction of the Court.

3.18	In those cases where legally privileged material has been acquired and retained, the
matter should be reported to the Intelligence Services Commissioner as soon as
reasonably practicable, as agreed with the Commissioner. Any material that is still being
retained should be made available to him or her if requested, including detail of whether
that material has been disseminated.

3.19	Material which has been identified as legally privileged should be retained only where it is
necessary and proportionate to do so in accordance with the statutory functions of each
of the Intelligence Services or where otherwise required by law. It must be securely

13

destroyed when its retention is no longer needed for those purposes. If such information
is retained, it must be reviewed at reasonable intervals to confirm that the justification for
its retention is still valid.

Confidential information

3.20	Particular consideration must also be given to cases that involve confidential personal
information, confidential constituent information and confidential journalistic material.

3.21	Confidential personal information is information held in confidence concerning an
individual (whether living or dead) who can be identified from it, and the material in
question relates to his physical or mental health or to spiritual counselling11. Such
information can include both oral and written communications. Such information as
described above is held in confidence if it is held subject to an express or implied
undertaking to hold it in confidence or is subject to a restriction on disclosure or an
obligation of confidentiality contained in existing legislation. For example, confidential
personal information might include consultations between a health professional and a
patient, or information from a patient's medical records.

3.22	Confidential constituent information is information relating to communications between a
Member of Parliament and a constituent in respect of constituency business. Again, such
information is held in confidence if it is held subject to an express or implied undertaking
to hold it in confidence or it is subject to a restriction on disclosure or an obligation of
confidentiality contained in existing legislation.

3.23	Confidential journalistic material includes material acquired or created for the purposes of
journalism and held subject to an undertaking to hold it in confidence, as well as
communications resulting in information being acquired for the purposes of journalism
and held subject to such an undertaking.

3.24	Where the intention is to acquire confidential information, the reasons should be clearly
documented and the specific necessity and proportionality of doing so should be carefully
considered. If the acquisition of confidential information is likely but not intended, any
possible mitigation steps should be considered and, if none is available, consideration
should be given to adopting special handling arrangements within the relevant
Intelligence Service.

3.25	Material which has been identified as confidential information should be retained only
where it is necessary and proportionate to do so in accordance with the statutory
functions of each of the Intelligence Services or where otherwise required by law. It must
be securely destroyed when its retention is no longer needed for those purposes. If such
information is retained, it must be reviewed at reasonable intervals to confirm that the
justification for its retention is still valid

3.26	Where confidential information is retained or disseminated to an outside body,
reasonable steps should be taken to mark the information as confidential. Where there is
any doubt as to the handling and dissemination of confidential information, advice should
be sought from a legal adviser within the relevant Intelligence Service before any further
dissemination of the material takes place.

11 Spiritual counselling means conversations between an individual and a Minister of Religion acting in his or her
official capacity, and where the individual being counselled is seeking or the Minister is imparting forgiveness,
absolution or the resolution of conscience with the authority of the Divine Beings(s) of their faith.

14

3.27	Any case where confidential information is retained should be reported to the Intelligence
Services Commissioner as soon as reasonably practicable, as agreed with the
Commissioner and any material which has been retained should be made available to
the Commissioner on request.

15

4.	Procedures for authorising equipment
interference under section 5

General basis for lawful activity

4.1	Subject to paragraph 4.4, a warrant under section 5 of the 1994 Act should be sought
wherever members of the Intelligence Services, or persons acting on their behalf or in
their support, conduct equipment interference in relation to equipment located in the
British Islands that would be otherwise unlawful.

4.2	If the equipment is located outside the British Islands, and the interference would be
otherwise unlawful, the Security Service should seek a warrant under section 5 of the
1994 Act. In the case of SIS and GCHQ, an authorisation under section 7 may be
obtained instead of a warrant under section 5 (see chapter 8).

4.3	An application for a section 5 warrant must usually12 13 be made by a member of the
Security Service, SIS or GCHQ for the taking of action in relation to that Intelligence
Service. In addition, the Security Service may make an application for a warrant to act
on behalf of SIS and GCHQ.

4.4	SIS and GCHQ may not be issued with a warrant for action in support of the prevention
or detection of serious crime which relates to equipment in the British Islands. The
Security Service may only be issued with a warrant for action in support of the prevention
or detection of serious crime which relates to equipment in the British Islands if it
authorises the taking of action in relation to conduct which would constitute one or more
offences and:

•	It involves the use of violence, results in substantial financial gain or is conduct by a
large number of persons in pursuit of a common purpose; or

•	a person aged twenty-one or over with no previous convictions could reasonably be
expected to be sentenced to three years’ imprisonment or more.

4.5	In some cases an equipment interference operation may also enable or facilitate
separate covert surveillance likely to result in the obtaining of private information about a
person. A directed or intrusive surveillance authorisation may need to be obtained under
Part 2 of the 2000 Act in such cases (see the Covert Surveillance and Property
Interference Revised Code of Practice). Operations involving covert surveillance and
equipment interference may be authorised as a combined warrant, although the criteria
for authorisation of each activity must be considered separately.

Application for an equipment interference warrant

4.6	An application for the issue or renewal of a section 5 warrant is made to the Secretary of
State. Each application should contain the following information:

12

This includes cases where the act is done in the British Islands, but is intended to be done in relation to
apparatus that is or is believed to be outside the British Islands, or in relation to anything appearing to originate
from such apparatus: section 7(9). See also section 7(10) to (12).

13 Where two Intelligence Services are conducting equipment interference as part of a joint operation only one
authorisation is required.

16

•	the identity or identities, where known, of those who possess or use the equipment
that is to be subject to the interference;

•	sufficient information to identify the equipment which will be affected by the
interference;

•	the nature and extent of the proposed interference, including any interference with
information derived from or related to the equipment;

•	what the operation is expected to deliver and why it could not be obtained by other
less intrusive means;

•	details of any collateral intrusion, including the identity of individuals and/or categories
of people, where known, who are likely to be affected.

•	whether confidential or legally privileged material may be obtained. If the equipment
interference is not intended to result in the acquisition of knowledge of matters subject
to legal privilege or confidential personal information, but it is likely that such
knowledge will nevertheless be acquired during the operation, the application should
identify all steps which will be taken to mitigate the risk of acquiring it;

•	details of any offence suspected or committed where relevant;

•	how the authorisation criteria (as set out at paragraph 4.7 below) are met;

•	what measures will be put in place to ensure proportionality is maintained (e.g.
filtering, disregarding personal information);

•	where an application is urgent, the supporting justification;

•	any action which may be necessary to install, modify or remove software on the
equipment;

•	in case of a renewal, the results obtained so far, or a full explanation of the failure to
obtain any results.

Issuing of section 5 warrants

4.7	Before issuing a warrant, the Secretary of State must:

•	think it necessary for the action to be taken for the purpose of assisting the relevant
Intelligence Service in carrying out its functions;

•	be satisfied that the taking of the action is proportionate to what the action seeks to
achieve;

•	take into account, in deciding whether a warrant is necessary and proportionate,
whether the information which it is thought necessary to obtain by the conduct
authorised by the warrant could reasonably be obtained by other means; and

•	be satisfied that there are satisfactory arrangements in force under the 1994 Act or
the 1989 Act in respect of disclosure of any information obtained by means of the
warrant, and that information obtained will be subject to those arrangements.

Urgent authorisation of a section 5 warrant

4.8	Section 6 of the 1994 Act makes provision for cases in which a warrant is required
urgently, yet the Secretary of State is not available to issue the warrant. In these cases
the Secretary of State will still personally authorise the equipment interference but the
warrant is signed by a senior official, following discussion of the case between the senior
official and the Secretary of State.

4.9	The 1994 Act restricts issue of warrants in this way to urgent cases where the Secretary
of State has expressly authorised the issue of the warrant, and requires the warrant to
contain a statement to that effect.

17

Renewals of warrants

4.10	A warrant, unless renewed, ceases to have effect at the end of the period of six months
beginning with the day on which it was issued (if the warrant was issued under the hand
of the Secretary of State) or at the end of the period ending with the fifth working day
following the day on which it was issued (in any other case).

4.11	If at any time before the day on which a warrant would cease to have effect the Secretary
of State considers it necessary for the warrant to continue to have effect for the purpose
for which it was issued, the Secretary of State may by an instrument under his hand
renew it for a period of six months beginning with the day it would otherwise cease to
have effect.

Cancellations of warrants

4.12	The Secretary of State must cancel a warrant if he is satisfied that the action authorised
by it is no longer necessary.

4.13	The person who made the application to the Secretary of State must apply for its
cancellation, if he is satisfied that the warrant no longer meets the criteria upon which it
was authorised.

Retrieval of equipment

4.14	Because of the time it can take to remove the means of interference it may also be
necessary to renew an equipment interference warrant in order to complete the removal.
Applications to the Secretary of State for renewal should state why the operation is being
or has been closed down, why it has not been possible to remove the means of
interference and any relevant timescales for removal.

18

5.	Keeping of records

Centrally retrievable records of warrants

5.1	The following information relating to all section 5 warrants for equipment interference
should be centrally retrievable for at least three years:

•	the date when a warrant is given;

•	the details of what equipment interference has occurred;

•	the result of periodic reviews of the warrants;

•	the date of every renewal; and

•	the date when any instruction was given by the Secretary of State to cease the
equipment interference.

19

6.	Handling of information and safeguards

Overview

6.1	This chapter provides further guidance on the processing, retention, disclosure deletion
and destruction of any information obtained by the Intelligence Services pursuant to an
equipment interference warrant. This information may include communications content
and communications data as defined in section 21 of the 2000 Act.

6.2	The Intelligence Services must ensure that their actions when handling information
obtained by means of equipment interference comply with the legal framework set out in
the 1989 and 1994 Acts (including the arrangements in force under these Acts14), the
Data Protection Act 1998 and this code, so that any interference with privacy is justified
in accordance with Article 8(2) of the European Convention on Human Rights.
Compliance with this legal framework will ensure that the handling of information
obtained by equipment interference continues to be lawful, justified and strictly controlled,
and is subject to robust and effective safeguards against abuse.

Use of information as evidence

6.3	Subject to the provisions in chapter 3 of this code, information obtained through
equipment interference may be used as evidence in criminal proceedings. The
admissibility of evidence is governed primarily by the common law, the Civil Procedure
Rules, section 78 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 198415 and the 1998 Act.

Handling information obtained by equipment interference

6.4	Paragraphs 6.6 to 6.11 provide guidance as to the safeguards which must be applied by
the Intelligence Services to the processing, retention, disclosure and destruction of all
information obtained by equipment interference16. Each of the Intelligence Services must
ensure that there are internal arrangements in force, approved by the Secretary of State,
for securing that these requirements are satisfied in relation to all information obtained by
equipment interference.

6.5	These arrangements should be made available to the Intelligence Services
Commissioner. The arrangements must ensure that the disclosure, copying and
retention of information obtained by means of an equipment interference warrant is
limited to the minimum necessary for the proper discharge of the Intelligence Services’
functions or for the additional limited purposes set out in section 2(2)(a) of the 1989 Act
and sections 2(2)(a) and 4(2)(a) of the 1994 Act. Breaches of these handling
arrangements must be reported to the Intelligence Services Commissioner as agreed
with him.

14

All information obtained by equipment interference must be handled in accordance with arrangements made
under section 2(2)(a) of the 1989 Act and sections 2(2)(a) and 4(2)(a) of the 1994 Act (and pursuant to sections
5(2)(c) and 7(3)(c) of the 1994 Act).

15	And section 76 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989.

16	The application of these safeguards to all information obtained by equipment interference is without prejudice as
to whether section 6 of the 1998 Act requires the application of these safeguards to information other than
communications content and associated communications data.

20

Dissemination of information

6.6	The number of persons to whom any of the information is disclosed, and the extent of
disclosure, must be limited to the minimum necessary for the proper discharge of the
Intelligence Services’ functions or for the additional limited purposes described in
paragraph 6.5. This obligation applies equally to disclosure to additional persons within
an Intelligence Service, and to disclosure outside the service. It is enforced by prohibiting
disclosure to persons who do not hold the required security clearance, and also by the
need-to-know principle: information obtained by equipment interference must not be
disclosed to any person unless that person’s duties are such that he needs to know
about the information to carry out those duties. In the same way only so much of the
information may be disclosed as the recipient needs; for example if a summary of the
information will suffice, no more than that should be disclosed.

6.7	The obligations apply not just to the Intelligence Service that obtained the information,
but also to anyone to whom the information is subsequently disclosed. In some cases
this may be achieved by requiring the latter to obtain the originator’s permission before
disclosing the information further. In others, explicit safeguards may be applied to
secondary recipients.

Copying

6.8	Information obtained by equipment interference may only be copied to the extent
necessary for the proper discharge of the Intelligence Services’ functions or for the
additional limited purposes described in paragraph 6.5. Copies include not only direct
copies of the whole of the information, but also extracts and summaries which identify
themselves as the product of an equipment interference operation. The restrictions must
be implemented by recording the making, distribution and destruction of any such copies,
extracts and summaries that identify themselves as the product of an equipment
interference operation.

Storage

6.9	Information obtained by equipment interference, and all copies, extracts and summaries
of it, must be handled and stored securely, so as to minimise the risk of loss or theft. It
must be held so as to be inaccessible to persons without the required level of security
clearance. This requirement to store such information securely applies to all those who
are responsible for the handling of the information.

Destruction

6.10	Communications content, communications data and other information obtained by
equipment interference, and all copies, extracts and summaries thereof, must be marked
for deletion and securely destroyed as soon as they are no longer needed for the
functions or purposes set out in paragraph 6.5. If such information is retained, it should
be reviewed at appropriate intervals to confirm that the justification for its retention is still
valid.

Personnel security

6.11	In accordance with the need-to-know principle, each of the Intelligence Services must
ensure that information obtained by equipment interference is only disclosed to persons
as necessary for the proper performance of the Intelligence Services’ statutory functions.

21

Persons viewing such product will usually require the relevant level of security clearance.
Where it is necessary for an officer to disclose information outside the service, it is that
officer's responsibility to ensure that the recipient has the necessary level of clearance.

22

7.	Application of the code to equipment
interference pursuant to section 7 of the
1994 Act

Application of the code to other equipment interference

17

7.1	SIS and GCHQ must as a matter of policy1' apply the provisions of this code in any case
where equipment interference is to be, or has been, authorised pursuant to section 7 of
the 1994 Act in relation to equipment located outside the British Islands.

7.2	This chapter provides specific additional guidance on certain aspects of the process for
authorising equipment interference pursuant to section 7 of the 1994 Act. Save as
specified below, GCHQ and SIS must comply with all other provisions of this code in
relation to equipment interference under section 7. In particular, GCHQ and SIS must
apply all the same procedures and safeguards when conducting equipment interference
authorised pursuant to section 7 as they do in relation to equipment interference
authorised under section 5.

General basis for lawful activity

7.3	An authorisation under section 7 of the 1994 Act may be sought wherever members of
SIS or GCHQ, or persons acting on their behalf or in their support, conduct equipment
interference in relation to equipment located outside the British Islands that would
otherwise be unlawful. This includes cases where the act is done in the British Islands,
but is intended to be done in relation to apparatus that is or is believed to be outside the
British Islands, or in relation to anything appearing to originate from such apparatus18.

7.4	If a member of SIS or GCHQ wishes to interfere with equipment located overseas but the
subject of the operation is known to be in the British Islands, consideration should be
given as to whether a section 8(1) interception warrant or a section 16(3) certification (in
relation to one or more extant section 8(4) warrants) under the 2000 Act should be
obtained in advance of commencing the operation authorised under section 7. In the
event that any equipment located overseas is brought to the British Islands during the
currency of the section 7 authorisation, and the act is one that is capable of being
authorised by a warrant under section 5, the interference is covered by a 'grace period' of
5 working days (see section 7(10) to 7(14)). This period should be used either to obtain
a warrant under section 5 or to cease the interference (unless the equipment is removed
from the British Islands before the end of the period).

7.5	An application for a section 7 authorisation should usually'9 be made by a member of SIS
or GCHQ for the taking of action in relation to that service. Responsibility for issuing
authorisations under section 7 rests with the Secretary of State.

7.6	An authorisation under section 7 may be specific to a particular operation or user, or may
relate to a broader class of operations. Where an authorisation relating to a broader
class of operations has been given by the Secretary of State under section 7, internal 17 18 19

17

And without prejudice as to arguments regarding the applicability of the ECHR.

18	See section 7(9).

19	Where two Intelligence Services are conducting equipment interference as part of a joint operation only one
authorisation is required.

23

approval to conduct operations under that authorisation in respect of equipment
interference must be sought from a designated senior official (see paragraphs 7.11 to
7.14).

Authorisations for equipment interference under section 7

7.7	An application for the giving or renewal of a section 7 authorisation is made to the
Secretary of State. Each application should contain the same information, as far as is
reasonably practicable in the circumstances, as an application for a section 5 equipment
interference warrant.

7.8	Before giving the authorisation, the Secretary of State must be satisfied that:

•	the equipment interference, or the operation in the course of which the equipment
interference will take place, will be necessary for the proper discharge of a function of
SIS orGCHQ;

•	there are satisfactory arrangements in force to secure that nothing will be done
beyond what is necessary for the discharge of SIS or GCHQ's functions and that the
nature and likely consequences of any acts done in reliance on the authorisation will
be reasonable having regard to the purposes for which they are carried out;

•	there are satisfactory arrangements in force under the 1994 Act in respect of
disclosure of any information obtained by means of the authorisation, and that any
information so obtained will be subject to those arrangements.

Urgent authorisation of a section 7 authorisation

7.9	Section 7(5) of the 1994 Act makes provision for cases in which an authorisation is
required urgently, yet the Secretary of State is not available to give the authorisation. In
these cases the Secretary of State will still personally authorise the equipment
interference but the authorisation is signed by a senior official, following discussion of the
case between the senior official and the Secretary of State.

7.10	The 1994 Act restricts issue of authorisations in this way to urgent cases where the
Secretary of State has expressly authorised the giving of the authorisation, and requires
the authorisation to contain a statement to that effect.

Other authorisations and internal approvals

7.11	An authorisation under section 7 may relate to a broad class of operations.

Authorisations of this nature are referred to specifically in section 7(4)(a) of the 1994 Act
which provides that the Secretary of State may give an authorisation which inter alia
relates to "acts of a description specified in the authorisation”. The legal threshold for
giving such an authorisation is the same as for a specific authorisation.

7.12	Where an authorisation relating to a broader class of operations has been given by the
Secretary of State under section 7, internal approval to conduct operations under that
authorisation in respect of equipment interference must be sought from a designated
senior official. In any case where the equipment interference may result in the
acquisition of confidential information, authorisation must be sought from an Annex A
approving officer. Where knowledge of matters subject to legal privilege may be
acquired, the Annex A approving officer must apply the tests set out at paragraph 3.4 to
3.7 (and "Secretary of State" should be read as "Annex A approving officer" for these
purposes).

24

7.13	The application for approval must set out the necessity, justification, proportionality and
risks of the particular operation, and should contain the same information, as and where
appropriate, as an application for a section 5 equipment interference warrant. Before
granting the internal approval, the designated senior official or Annex A approving officer
must be satisfied that the operation is necessary for the proper discharge of the functions
of the Intelligence Service, and that the taking of the action is proportionate to what the
action seeks to achieve. The designated senior official or Annex A approving officer
must consult the Foreign and Commonwealth Office or seek the endorsement of the
Secretary of State for any particularly sensitive operations.

7.14	All internal approvals must be subject to periodic review at least once every 6 months to
ensure the operations continue to be necessary and proportionate. The approvals for
particularly sensitive operations should be reviewed more frequently, depending on the
merits of the case.

Renewals of authorisations

7.15	A section 7 authorisation, unless renewed, ceases to have effect at the end of the period
of six months beginning with the day on which it was given (if the authorisation was given
under the hand of the Secretary of State) or at the end of the period ending with the fifth
working day following the day on which it was given (in any other case).

7.16	If at any time before the day on which an authorisation would cease to have effect the
Secretary of State considers it necessary for the authorisation to continue to have effect
for the purpose for which it was given, the Secretary of State may by an instrument under
his hand renew it for a period of six months beginning with the day it would otherwise
cease to have effect.

Cancellations of authorisations

7.17	The Secretary of State must cancel an authorisation if he is satisfied that any act
authorised by it is no longer necessary20.

20	See section 7(8).

25

8.	Oversight by Intelligence Services
Commissioner

8.1	The Intelligence Services Commissioner provides independent oversight of the use by
the Intelligence Services of the powers contained within the 1994 Act. This code does
not cover the exercise of any of the Commissioner’s functions.

8.2	It is the duty of any member of the Intelligence Services who uses these powers to
comply with any request made by the Commissioner to disclose or provide any
information he requires for the purpose of enabling him to carry out his functions. Such
persons must also report any action that is believed to be contrary to the provisions of
the 1994 Act to the Commissioner.

26

9.	Complaints

9.1	The 2000 Act establishes an independent Tribunal (the Investigatory Powers Tribunal).
This Tribunal will be made up of designated senior members of the judiciary and the legal
profession and is independent of the Government. The Tribunal has full powers to
investigate and decide any case within its jurisdiction. This Code does not cover the
exercise of the Tribunal’s functions.

9.2	Details of the relevant complaints procedure are available on the Tribunal’s website at:
http://www.ipt-uk.com or can be obtained from the following address:

Investigatory Powers Tribunal

PO Box 33220

London

SW1H 9ZQ

020 7035 3711

27

10.	Glossary

Confidential information

Designated senior official

Equipment interference

Intelligence Services
Internal approval

Confidential personal information (such as
medical records or spiritual counselling),
confidential journalistic material, confidential
discussions between Members of Parliament
and their constituents, or matters subject to
legal privilege. See Chapter 3 for a full
explanation.

"Designated senior official” means a person
holding at least the grade of Deputy Director
with SIS or GCHQ and who has been
designated for the purpose in question by (as
relevant) the Chief of the SIS or the Director of
GCHQ or their nominated deputies.

Any interference (whether remotely or
otherwise) by the Intelligence Services, or
persons acting on their behalf of in their
support, with equipment producing
electromagnetic, acoustic and other emissions,
or information derived from or related to such
equipment, which is to be authorised under
section 5 of the 1994 Act, in order to do any or
all of the following:

a)	obtain information from the equipment in
pursuit of intelligence requirements;

b)	obtain information concerning the
ownership, nature and use of the
equipment with a view to meeting
intelligence requirements;

c)	locate and examine, remove, modify or
substitute equipment hardware or software
which is capable of yielding information of
the type described in a) and b);

d)	enable and facilitate surveillance activity by
means of the equipment;

"Information” may include communications
content, and communications data as defined
in section 21 of the 2000 Act.

The Security Service, SIS and GCHQ.

Internal approval given by a designated senior
official to conduct operations under an
authorisation relating to a broader class of
operations given by the Secretary of State
under section 7 of the 1994 Act.

28

Legal privilege	Matters subject to legal privilege are defined (as relevant) in section 98 of the Police Act 1997, section 33 of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 and Article 12 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989. This includes certain communications between professional legal advisers and their clients or persons representing the client.
Public authority	Any public organisation, including the Intelligence Services.
Secretary of State	Any Secretary of State (in practice this will generally be the Home Secretary in the case of the Security Service, and the Foreign Secretary in the case of SIS and GCHQ).

29

11.	Annex A

Authorisation levels when knowledge of confidential information is likely to be acquired

Intelligence Service	Authorisation level
The Security Service	Deputy Director General
The Secret Intelligence Service	A Director of the Secret Intelligence Service
The Government Communications Headquarters	A Director of the Government Communications Headquarters

30