 The Eurepean Center tn Became the 

FROM:
Directnr, Enterprise Management 
Run Date: HEDGE

 

NBA to help build up enpnbi?tiea nfthe intelligence center in 


 

inf-4

Good as it is, the ESC is about to get better. Cm 5 July EDGE, the
Director, NSA approved the Concept" which transforms the European
Security Center into the European Security ?pemtions Center 
With this move, NSA will help build up the Center's capabilities to allow it to
assume even greater responsibilities within the worldwide SICINT Enterprise.
What will change, specifically?

More Missions

Beginning in through FY13, the ESDC will evolve by expanding or
adding more missions that will support national, theater and regional intelligence
needs. ESDC's new or expanded missions include:

additional select Counterterrorism targets,

the African Union,

Nigerian Energy Security,

targets in Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, and Libya, and

complementary capabilities in SICINT Development, Ceospatial Analysis and
Technical SICINT.

Changes in Manning

that's not the only change. To ensure manning stability and to foster
true nationalltactical integration, a core civilians and multi-service Service
Element military personnel? will work side-by-side with the [primarily]
Army tactical SICINT personnel who have manned the ESDC since its start-up.

personnel at work
Background: The ESC

The European Security Center, primarily a theater SICINT Center manned
by Army Tactical SICINT personnel from the Military Intelligence Battalion
in Darmstadt, Germany, was created over two years ago. It was the first center to
use tactical resources -- augmented by a few NSA civilians -- to work both theater
information needs as well as national missions.

Today, the ESC is highly successful in producing intelligence for both
national customers and the European Command. Its national mission focuses on
select Counterterrorism targets, select Sub-Saharan Africa and North Africa target
sets, SICINT Development and Ceospatial Analysis missions. Its theater missions
include Force Protection, Global War on Terrorism support, Pan Sahel?, and
targets in West Africa.

The ESC's most recent SICINT accomplishments include providing the
majority of reporting and target tracking on the April EDGE coup attempt in Chad;
providing linguistic and analytic support during the on-going Israeli-Lebanon crisis;
and providing analytic and linguistic support which facilitated the arrests of
terrorist facilitators operating in Italy.

The Concept"

Llan

The decision to move forward with the creation of the ESDC was founded on
the site's ability 

contribute to the national mission,

plug into Theater all-source elements,

optimize support to Theater operations,

provide tactical over-watch [intelligence support to deployed troops}, and
maximize Second and Third party partnerships.

Under DIRNSA guidance, the US Army will retain its role as Executive Agent and
Host for the new ESDC.

When fully realized, the Concept" will be a model for future
nationalltactical integration, by providing an in-theater capability to produce
high-impact analysis in support of all levels ofnational, tactical and Theater
information needs.

PDCs:

 

The 

 

Notes:

The multi-service SCE military personnel are part of the Consolidated
Program also known as Army tactical SICINT personnel
are known as 

The Pan Sahel Initiative is a State Department-led effort to assist Mali,
Niger, Chad, and Mauritania in detecting and responding to suspicious movement
of'people and goods across and within their borders.

SofA

AofA

