 European Tia-12111111231 Center Area Checked fur 
Ordnance

FROM: multiple anthers

Run Date: DEM EIEDDE

 

The ETC facility wee fern day wher frwee?getere made Sure there wee
no danger.

luf'j

 

During World War II the site on which the European Technical Center
is located [in Main: Kastel, Germany} served as a tank repair depot. Not too
surprisingly, the station was a key target ofAllied homhing. Cm December 2G, EDGE,
during survey activities ofthe area for installation ofan underground iiher optic
line, metallic anomalies were discovered and these were suspected of being
unexploded ordnance, since such items had been discovered previously.

Operating with the following guiding principles, ETC and NSAW
personnel hegan contingency planning to ensure that critical ETC functions would
continue in the event of an explosion.

I To protect human life,

I To protect husiness equities in a prudent manner,

- To keep as much ofthe business running as possible, and

i To put in place contingency measures for personnel, equipment,
and communication links.

By 12 January EDGE, it had been determined that the risk of an
uncontrolled explosion was low and that the distance from the closest anomaly to
ETC huildings was outside the restricted zone as required by German law.
However, to ensure safety, the entire base was to he closed to all personnel on
24 and 25 January. Based on provided by ETC to the Provost Marshall,
ETC was permitted to man the Network Communication Center with two critical
staffmemhers.

ETC and NSAW personnel worked to mitigate the risk by setting up an
alternate communications facility at Main: Finthen. Unfortunately only sin of the
circuits passing through ETC from the Top IDD Circuits list could he accommodated
by the alternate link and none of those was a foreign partner link. [All were directly
supporting efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan.) A message was sent to the appropriate
SLDs Liaison Of?cers} to notify the partners ofthe potential impact, hut
also to assure them that the chance ofdisruption was small.

Excavation was initiated on 24January. The four anomalies were dug up and no
ordnance was found. Three ofthe four holes contained miscellaneous metallic
debris and the fourth contained I-heams that supported an underground storage
area or tunnel in the original WWII facility. The base was to he reopened for normal
traf?c at IBDD local time and normal ETC operations were resumed on 25
January.

 

This article is reprinted from Fehruary's Foreign A?hirs Digest. It was
written 

  

Executive Staff Of?cer - DPI 
Operations Staff - and


Eof'j

3of3

