communications involved in sending a single message may each form a separate event.

On occasion single events can end up being split into multiple events because of the nature of the
intercept mechanism. For example an e-mail may be split into individual messages by Mail Transport
Agents when delivering a single message to multiple destinations. This can result in the appearance of
multiple events depending on the point at which the event was intercepted.

Conversely, an event can be the summarisation of many individual transactions, taking place over a long
period of time. For example, instant messaging text chat events in HAUSTORIUM arc actually the
summarisation of a scries of separate messages, each of indicates people joining and leaving the chat,
inviting others and accepting invitations etc. The final event that is presented to the analyst shows only the
group list of people involved, in order to avoid swamping the analyst in huge numbers of separate trivial
rows of data.

[edit] Types of Event

Example Event types from Mobile traffic

Events have traditionally been categorised according to the technology involved - Telephony. C2C and
Geo. GCHQ is currently developing a more activity-centric (and technology agnostic) view based on
types such as:

•	Communications (Comms) Events

•	Presence Events

•	Geo reference Events

The Mobile Applications Project have drawn up a diagram showing the relationships between some
example event types: RightArrow.jpg

[edit] Comms Event

A Communications or Comms Event occurs when one party communicates with another. Comms Event
types include:

•	Telephone calls, both landlinc and mobile

•	C2C telephony: VoIP and SIP

•	Correspondence: sending and reading emails, including wcbmail

[edit] Presence Event

Presence Events are defined by the INTERSTELLAR DUST ICD - sec 1DUST (PPF App). This
includes:

•	Presence TDIs - real world events where there is an active user (e.g. logging into a website,
requesting a web page)

•	Google Maps and Earth events - where the active user has requested a map tile

•	HTTP Get and Post - where the user has requested a web page

•	Web search events - where the active user has searched for something (e.g. in google)

•	Telephony presence (i.c. location updates, or other location information about the active user
contained in the signalling)

[edit] Social Event