SECRET//ORCON,NOFORN

CERTIFICATION OF THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE AND THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL PURSUANT TO SUBSECTION 702(g) OF TfififFORpGN

INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT OF 1978, AS AMENDE^ ' ' 0 ^ H

IN THE MATTER OF FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS, FOREIGN FACTIONS, FOREIGN !
ENTITIES, AND FOREIGN-BASED POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS '

DNI/AG 702(g) Certification 2010-A

Based on the representations made in the supporting affidavits of General Keith B.
Alexander, United States Army, Director of the National Security Agency (NSA), Leon E.
Panetta, Director, Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and Robert S. Mueller, III, Director,

Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), in the above-referenced matter, the Director of National
Intelligence and the Attorney General, being duly sworn, hereby certify that: (S//OC,NF)

(1)	there are procedures in place that will be submitted with this certification for approval
by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court that are reasonably designed to —

a.	ensure that an acquisition authorized pursuant to subsection 702(a) of the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, as amended ("the Act"), is limited to
targeting persons reasonably believed to be located outside the United States; and

b.	prevent the intentional acquisition of any communication as to which the sender
and all intended recipients are known at the time of acquisition to be located in
the United States;

(2)	the minimization procedures with respect to such acquisition —

a.	meet the definition of minimization procedures under subsections 101(h) and
301(4) of the Act; and

SECRET//ORCON,NOFORN

Classified by: The Attorney General
Reason:	1.4(c)

Declassify on: 15 July 2035

SECRET//ORCON,NOFORN

b.	will be submitted with this certification for approval by the Foreign Intelligence
■	Surveillance Court;

(3)	guidelines have been adopted in accordance with subsection 702(f) of the Act to
ensure compliance with the limitations in subsection 702(b) of the Act and to ensure
that an application for a court order is filed as required by the Act;

(4)	the procedures and guidelines referred to in sub-paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) above are
consistent with the requirements of the fourth amendment to the Constitution of the
United States;

(5)	a significant purpose of the acquisition is to obtain foreign intelligence information;

(6)	the acquisition involves obtaining foreign intelligence information from or with the
assistance of an electronic communication service provider; and

(7)	the acquisition complies with the limitations in subsection 702(b) of the Act. (S)

As described in the above-referenced affidavit of General Alexander, the foreign

intelligence information to be acquired pursuant to this certification concerns foreign powers as
defined in 50 U.S.C. § 1801(a)(1) ("foreign governments or any components thereof, whether or
not recognized by the United States"); 50 U.S.C. § 1801(a)(2) ("factions of foreign nations, not
substantially composed of United States persons"); 50 U.S.C. § 1801(a)(3) ("entities openly
acknowledged by a foreign government or governments to be directed and controlled by such
foreign government or governments"); 50 U.S.C. § 1801(a)(5) ("foreign-based political
organizations, not substantially composed of United States persons"); and 50 U.S.C. § 1801(a)(6)
("entities directed and controlled by a foreign government or governments"). A list of foreign
powers satisfying these statutory definitions is attached herewith as Exhibit F. If NSA seeks to
acquire foreign intelligence information concerning additional foreign powers as defined in

SECRET//ORCON,NOFORN

2

SECRET//ORCON,NOFORN

50 U.S.C. § 1801(a)(1), (2), (3), (5), or (6), NSA may target consistent with this certification
non-United States persons reasonably believed to be located outside the United States who
possess, are expected to receive, and/or are likely to communicate foreign intelligence
information concerning those additional foreign powers, provided that NSA notifies the Attorney
General and Director of National Intelligence within five business days of implementing such
targeting. Such notification will include a description of the factual basis for NSA's
determination that the additional government, faction, entity, or political organization is a foreign
power as defined in 50 U.S.C. § 1801(a)(1), (2), (3), (5), or (6). (S//OC,NF)

On the basis of the foregoing, the targeting of non-United States persons reasonably
believed to be located outside the United States to acquire foreign intelligence information, as
described above, is authorized, and such authorization shall be effective on August 17, 2010, or
on the date upon which the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court issues an order pursuant to
subsection 702(i)(3) of the Act, whichever is later. Such targeting is authorized for a period of
one year from the effective date of this authorization. This authorization reauthorizes DNI/AG
702(g) Certification 2009-A ("In the Matter of Foreign Governments, Foreign Factions, Foreign
Entities, and Foreign-Based Political Organizations"), which was authorized by the Director of
National Intelligence and Attorney General pursuant to section 702(g) of the Act on July 29,
2009. (S//OC,NF)

Amendment 1 to DNI/AG 702(g) Certifications 2008-A and 2009-A

Furthermore, in accordance with subsection 702(i)(l)(C) of the Act, the NSA, FBI, and
CIA minimization procedures authorized for use under DNI/AG 702(g) Certifications 2008-A
and 2009-A are hereby amended. Specifically, the use of the NSA, FBI, and CIA minimization
procedures attached herewith as Exhibits B, D, and E, respectively, in connection with foreign

SECRET//ORCON,NOFORN

3

SECRET//ORCON,NOFORN

intelligence information acquired in accordance with DNI/AG 702(g) Certifications 2008-A and
2009-A is authorized.1 Such authorization shall be effective on August 17, 2010, or on the date
upon which the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court issues an order concerning these
amendments pursuant to subsection 702(i)(3) of the Act, whichever is later. (S//OC,NF)

— The remainder of this page intentionally left blank —

1 As certified above, these minimization procedures meet the definition of minimization procedures under
subsections 101(h) and 301(4) of the Act and will be submitted herewith for approval by the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Court, (S//OC,NF)

SECRET//GRCON,NOFORN

4

SECRET//ORCON,NOFORN

VERIFICATION (U)

I declare under penalty of perjury that the facts set forth in the foregoing certification in
the Matter of Foreign Governments, Foreign Factions, Foreign Entities, and Foreign-Based
Political Organizations, DNI/AG 702(g) Certification 2010-A, are true and correct to the best of
my knowledge and belief. I further declare under penalty of perjury that the facts set forth in the
foregoing amendments to the minimization procedures to be used in connection with foreign
intelligence information acquired in accordance with DNI/AG 702(g) Certifications 2008-A and
2009-A are true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief. Executed pursuant to
28 U.S.C. § 1746 on July j£_, 2010. (S)

SECRET//ORCON,N OFORN

5

SICRET//ÖRCON,NOFORN

VERIFICATION (U)

I declare under penalty of perjury that the facts set forth in the foregoing certification in
the Matter of Groups Engaged in International Terrorism or Activities in Preparation Thetcfor,
DNI/AG 702(g) Certification 2010-B, are true and correct to the best of my knowledge and
belief. I further declare under penalty of perjury that the facts set forth in the foregoing
amendment to the minimization procedures to be used in connection with foreign intelligence
information acquired ill accordance with DNI/AG 702(g) Certifications 20Q8-B and 2Q09-B aie
true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief. Executed pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1746
on July , 2010. (S)

Acting Director of National Intelligence

SECRET//ORCON»NOFORN

6