Claim No.

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN S BENCH DIVISION
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT

BETWEEN

THE QUEEN

on the Application of David MIRANDA

Claimant

-v-

(1)	SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

(2)	COMMISSIONER OF POLICE FOR THE METROPOLIS

Defendants

CLAIMANT’S SUMMARY STATEMENT OF FACTS AND GROUNDS

INTRODUCTION

1.	This is an application for judicial review of the Defendants' use powers under
Schedule 7 to the Terrorism Act 2000, as the Claimant passed through the
international transit area of Heathrow Airport on 18 August 2013. The powers were
used to:

(1)	detain, question and search the Claimant, under threat of criminal prosecution
for failing to comply.

(2)	seize confidential, journalistic material in his possession.

2.	This claim gives rise to important matters of principle regarding the purpose, scope
and extent of the coercive powers under Schedule 7 to the Terrorism Act 2000
( TACT’) and the protection of journalists’ sources and confidential journalistic
material. The extensive public and political reaction to the Defendants’ actions in this
country and abroad underscores the importance of these issues.

3.	The Second Defendant was responsible for the actions of the police officers that
exercised Schedule 7 powers. The First Defendant is joined insofar as any role she
or her department played in that process, and in relation to challenges made under
the Human Rights Act 1998.

11

INTERIM RELIEF

4.	The Claimant brings this action on an urgent and expedited basis. In order to ensure
that the objective of the claim is not irremediably frustrated, the Claimant seeks
interim relief from the court to prevent the Defendants from disclosing, transferring,
distributing or interfering with the data and other materials that were seized from him
pursuant to Schedule 7, pending the determination of this claim.

5.	A key purpose for the Claimant making this application is to protect the integrity and
confidentiality of a large quantity of confidential and journalistic material that was
seized from him at Heathrow Airport. If interim relief is refused then the objective of
these proceedings will be irretrievably frustrated, to the significant detriment of the
Claimant and the other journalistic sources whose confidential information is
contained in the materials seized by the Defendants.

6.	An interim injunction would cause no significant prejudice to the Defendants, who
would remain in possession of the material (and/or copies of it), which was seized
from the Claimant, until the outcome of these proceedings.

7.	In these circumstances the balance of convenience is overwhelmingly in favour of
granting interim relief in the terms set out in the draft order at Annex A.

OVERVIEW OF GROUNDS

The Submissions

8.	The Claimant’s submissions fall under three heads:

{1)	M isuse of statutory power

Schedule 7 powers may only be used to determine whether a person appears
to be someone who 7s or has been concerned in the commission, preparation
or instigation of acts of terrorism

Schedule 7 powers may not be used merely to obtain material that may be
sensitive or classified in the hands of someone who is not permitted to
possess it; nor may it be used simply to retrieve material that may - in theory
- be of possible use to terrorists, if terrorists were to come into possession of
it.

In using Schedule 7 powers for those purposes the Defendants made an error
of law and/or used the discretion given by Schedule 7 for an improper
purpose.

(2)	Ho jurisdiction to in respect of transit passengers

Schedule 7 powers may only be used if the relevant officer believes that the
person’s presence at the port in question is connected with:

(a)	his entering or leaving Great Britain or Northern Ireland;

(b)	his travelling by air within Great Britain or Northern Ireland;

(c)	he is on a ship or aircraft which has arrived at any place in Great
Britain or Northern Ireland.

The Second Defendant’s officers were aware that the Claimant was in transit
between Germany and Brazil at the time he was stopped. He did pass
through immigration and was not entering’ or leaving’ the UK. Neither was
travelling ‘within’ Great Britain. Nor was he on an aircraft at the time he was
stopped.

There was therefore no jurisdiction for the use of Schedule 7 powers.

(3) Violation of fundamental rights

(a)	As a matter of general principle, the coercive powers to detain,
question, search and remove material under Schedule 7 are
disproportionate and lack adequate safeguards to be in accordance
with law. The powers are incompatible with the rights protected under
Articles 5, 6, 8 and 10.

The Claimant seeks a declaration of incompatibility sought under s 4
of the Human Rights Act 1998.

(b)	Whether or not the Defendants’ use of Schedule 7 is incompatible with
fundamental rights in general terms, it was disproportionate in the
specific context of the rights of a person pursuant to Article 10, which
were engaged in this case.

Observation on declaration of incompatibility

9.	In submitting that Schedule 7 powers are incompatible with the Claimant’s
fundamental rights, part of the Claimant’s submissions rely on the decision of the
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in Gillan v UK (2010) 50 EHRR 45. That
case concerned with section 44 of TACT that has since been repealed. Like
Schedule 7, section 44 allowed coercive powers of search to be used without an
officer having reasonable grounds to suspect a person of an offence. The ECtHR
found that the lack of adequate safeguards against abuse resulted in a breach of
fundamental rights pursuant to Article 8 {and, by implication, 5) of the ECHR.

10.	The decision of the ECtHR in Gillan v UK is in conflict with the earlier decision of the
House of Lords in the same case, R (Gillan) v Commissioner of Police for the
Metropolis [2011] UKSC 2; [2006] 2 AC 307. That conflict is yet to be resolved and
this may limit the capacity of this Court to make a declaration of incompatibility.1 The
Claimant would, in any event, seek for this Court to give a ruling on whether or not
Schedule 7 powers are compatible with such rights, even if a deceleration under
section 4 cannot be made.

1 For a lower courts approach to a conflict between the House of Lords / UK Supreme Court and ECtHR see,

Kay v Lambeth [2006] 2 AC 465 at [43],

14

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The Ciaimant

11.	The Claimant is a Brazilian citizen. He is in a long term relationship with Mr Glenn
Greenwald, a prominent American journalist who has written a series of stories for
The Guardian and The New York Times including articles relating to mass
surveillance programmes by the US and UK government agencies. The Claimant
regularly assists Mr Greenwald in his journalistic work and was doing so at the time
he was stopped and detained by the Second Defendant’s officers.

12.	On 18 August 2013 the Claimant was travelling from Berlin to the couple’s home in
Rio di Janeiro via Heathrow Airport. During his trip to Berlin, the Claimant visited
Laura Poitras, a documentary film-maker who has been working with Mr Greenwald
on various high profile journalism projects. The Guardian paid for the Claimant’s
flights to and from Berlin because his travel was directly connected to the journalistic
work he was doing with Mr Greenwald.

The Claimant’s detention at Heathrow

13.	Shortly after disembarking from the plane, which arrived at Heathrow at 8:05am, the
Claimant travelled thorough the international transit area. He did not at any time
travel through immigration control.

14.	While in transit he was stopped by the Second Defendant’s officers exercising
powers under Schedule 7 of TACT. At 8.15am he was issued with a Schedule 7
Notice of Examination TACT 1 form' which described the purpose of his detention as
follows (emphasis added):

This notice is to inform you that you are being questioned under the
provisions of Schedule 7 to the Terrorism Act 2000 as someone whose
presence at a port of in the border area (in Northern Ireland) is connected
with entering or leaving any place in Great Britain or Northern Ireland.

This applies to a person travelling by air [....]

This in itself does not necessarily mean that the Examining Officer who is
questioning you suspects that you are a person who is, or has been,
concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism.

The purpose of the questioning is to enable him to determine whether you
appear to be such a person.

At this stage you are not under caution, arrest or detention. However, should
the circumstances change you will be notified.

Your Duties

[...you must answer all questions and hand over any data or documents
requested ]

If you deliberately fail to comply with any of these duties, you could be
prosecuted under paragraph 18(1) of Schedule 7 to the Terrorism Act 2000.

15.	At 8.25am the Claimant was served with the TACT2 Notice of Detention (‘INTERIM

2011;).2

16.	The Claimant asked for his own lawyer to attend. Eventually one of the officials
contacted Mr Greenwafd, who Guardian News and Media of the Claimants position.
Bindmans LLP solicitors were contacted and made urgent arrangements for Mr
Gavin Kendall (a legal representative) to attend upon the Claimant.

17.	After multiple unsuccessful efforts to make contact with the Claimant through an
initial telephone call, Mr Kendall attended the airport in person. Mr Kendall arrived at
Terminal 5 at 3.25pm. He called a police sergeant who said he would send someone
to collect him. Twenty minutes later an officer brought Mr Kendall through to the
detention area where the Claimant was being held.

18.	The only explanation the police gave for their treatment of the Claimant, was that he
had been detained pursuant Schedule 7 Terrorism Act 2000 at 8.05am. The police
confirmed that he would be released at 5.05pm, when the nine-hour statutory time
limit would expire.

19.	At 4.05pm Mr Kendall was finally granted access to the Claimant.

20.	Mr Kendall asked police officers whether the Claimant was being detained as a result
of a suspected offence in the UK or on behalf of another state, country or
government organisation abroad. The police informed him that they could not say
and would not provide any further explanation for his detention. The police also
refused to confirm what the Claimant had been asked before Mr Kendall arrived, and * lo

z Insert reference.

.■» Q

lo

refused to provide Mr Kendall with a record of what was discussed. The Claimant
asked for a pen to write down the questions and this too had been refused.

21.	The Claimant, for whom English is not his first language, was not provided with an
interpreter at any point during his detention.

Questioning of the Claimant and seizure of his possessions

22.	During the course of the day, the Claimant was subjected to intensive, wide-ranging
and intrusive questioning by a number of different officers. But he was not asked -
nor was it suggested - that he was involved with terrorist groups, organisations or
terrorist activity. The Claimant was informed that he could face imprisonment if he did
not cooperate with the officers’ inquiries. The Claimant found the whole experience
frightening, stressful and intimidating.

23.	The following items of property were seized from the Claimant (see the ‘Detained
Property List:

(1)	Samsung laptop

(2)	Samsung phone

(3)	1 x gold memory stick

(4)	1 x silver memory stick

(5)	2 x DVDs

(6)	Sony Games console.

(7)	Smart watch

(8)	Portable hard drive.

24.	The Claimant's laptop, telephone, memory sticks and hard drive contained large
amounts of confidential journalistic material as well as persona! material. This
property remains in the possession of the Second Defendant and/or the First
Defendant.

25.	In addition to being required to answer the officers' questions, the Claimant was
compelled to provide the secret passwords for his electronic devices and encrypted
storage devices.

17

i he Claimant’s release from detention

26.	The Claimant was released from detention shortly before the expiry of the nine-hour
maximum period of detention under Schedule 7. After his detention ended, the
Claimant was offered the possibility to enter the United Kingdom in order to
accelerate the process for boarding a flight back to Brazil. The Claimant declined to
enter the United Kingdom and remained in the international transit zone of the airport
until his departure to Rio de Janeiro later that evening.

Public explanations for the Claimant’s detention

27.	On 20 August 2013, it was made public that the First Defendant and the Prime
Minister had been notified of the decision to detain and search the Claimant in
advance of his arrival at Heathrow Airport. The United States Government also
received advance notification of the decision.

28.	The First Defendant also gave detailed public interviews indicating that the decision
to exercise Schedule 7 powers in relation to the Claimant was made by the Second
Defendant’s officers.

29.	in a widely broadcast television interview, the First Defendant provided the following
explanation for the use of Schedule 7 powers in relation to the Claimant (emphasis
added):

‘I think that it is right, given that it is the first duty of the government to protect
the public, that if the police believe that somebody has in their possession
highly sensitive stolen information which could help terrorists which could lead
to a loss of lives then it is right that the police act. That is what the law
enables them to do.’

30.	The Claimant’s detention has provoked widespread public debate about the use of
Schedule 7 in this case and generally. A number of other parties, including David
Anderson QC the independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, have expressed
concern over the use of the power in this case and stressed the importance for a
clear explanation as to why the powers were used in relation to the Claimant.

13

The Guardian newspaper's experience

31.	In May 2013, The Guardian newspaper and other international media outlets,
published material that had been obtained by Edward Snowden, an American
computer specialist who had worked for the US Central Intelligence Agency and the
US National Security Agency. The Guardian was assisted in that journalistic work by
a number of persons and their sources, including the Claimant's partner, Glenn
Greenwald and, through Mr Greenwald, the Claimant himself.

32.	The editor of The Guardian, Mr Alan Rusbridger has indicated the following3:

(1)	From May 2013, the genera! public as well as the UK authorities (including
the police, the Home Office and the Security Services) would have been
aware that The Guardian were publishing articles derived from the sensitive
material obtained by Mr Snowden.

(2)	The Guardian had discussions with Security Services officials as to the nature
of those publications, culminating in the officials eventually indicating - in firm
terms - that they wished to have the material returned to them.

(3)	The Guardian declined to return the material, but indicated that it would
consent to its destruction in the presence of Security Services officials. The
Guardian was aware that copies of that material remained in existence in
other locations outside of the UK.

(4)	At no point in the discussions with Security Services officials was there any
suggestion that by being in possession of, or having access to such material,
The Guardian or people assisting their work may be involved in the
'commission, instigation or preparation of acts of terrorism'.

(5)	The clear indication was that the material needed to be returned because it
was classified and sensitive and had been taken improperly. But here was no
suggestion that any person dealing with that material was or could be
concerned in acts of terrorism. However, there was a determined effort to put

3 Ref witness statement.

19

pressure on persons connected with the Guardian in order to obtain the return
of that material.

LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK

The Terrorism Act 2000

Schedule 7 of TACT4

33.	Schedule 7 of TACT gives police officers and other officials broad powers to
determine whether or not a person appears to be a terrorist, as defined by section
40(1 )(b) of TACT. Importantly, those powers do not require reasonable grounds for
suspicion on behalf of the officers exercising them.

34.	Section 1 of TACT defines 'terrorism' and states:

1(1) In this Act terrorism’ means the use or threat of action where—

(a)	the action falls within subsection (2),

(b)	the use or threat is designed to influence the government [or an
international governmental organisation] or to intimidate the public or a
section of the public, and

(c)	the use or threat is made for the purpose of advancing a political,
religious [racial] or ideological cause.

(2)	Action falls within this subsection if it—

(a)	involves serious violence against a person;

(b)	involves serious damage to property;

(c)	endangers a person's life, other than that of the person committing the
action;

(d)	creates a serious risk to the health or safety of the public or a section
of the public; or

(e)	is designed seriously to interfere with or seriously to disrupt an
electronic system.

(3)	The use or threat of action falling within subsection (2) which involves the use

of firearms or explosives is terrorism whether or not subsection (1)(b) is

satisfied.

(4)	In this section—

(a)	action’ includes action outside the United Kingdom,

(b)	a reference to any person or to property is a reference to any person,
or to property, wherever situated,

(c)	a reference to the public includes a reference to the public of a country
other than the United Kingdom, and 1

1 Bundle X / Tab X

20

(d)	‘the government' means the government of the United Kingdom, of a
Part of the United Kingdom or of a country other than the United
Kingdom.

(5)	in this Act a reference to action taken for the purposes of terrorism includes a
reference to action taken for the benefit of a proscribed organisation.

35.	Section 40 of TACT5 states:

40(1) In this Part6 terrorist1 means a person who -

(a)	has committed an offence under any of section 11, 12, 15 to 18, 54
and 56 to 63; or

(b)	is, or has been, concerned in the commission, preparation or
instigation of acts of terrorism.

(2)	The reference in subsection (1)(b) to a person who has been concerned in
the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism includes a
reference to a person who has been, whether before or after the passing of
this Act, concerned in the commission, preparation of instigation of acts of
terrorism within the meaning of given by section 1.7

36.	Schedule 7, paragraph 2 of TACT states:

2(1) An examining officer8 may question a person to whom this paragraph applies
for the purpose of determining whether he appears to be a person falling
within section 40(1 )(b).

(2)	This paragraph applies to a person if-

(a)	he is at a port or in a border area, and

(b)	the examining officer believes that the person's presence at the port or
in the area is connected with his entering or leaving Great Britain or
Northern Ireland...

(3)	This paragraph also applies to a person on a ship or aircraft which has arrived
at any place in Great Britain or Northern Ireland (whether from within or
outside Great Britain or Northern Ireland).

(4)	An examining officer may exercise his powers under this paragraph whether
or not he has grounds for suspecting that a person falls within section
40(11(b),

37.	Schedule 7, paragraph 5 imposes obligations on the person under examination:

5 A person questioned under paragraph 2... must -

(a)	give the examining officer any information in his possession which the
officer reguests:

5 Bundle X / Tab X

" Part V of TACT - 'Counter Terrorist Powers'

7 Section 1 of TACT defines terrorism - Bundle X / Tab X

^ An ‘examining officer' is a constable, an immigration officer or designated customs officers (see Schedule 7,
paragraph 1(1) of TACT)

21

(b)	give the examining officer on request either a valid passport which
includes a photograph or another document which establishes his
identity;

(c)	declare whether he has with him documents of a kind specified by the
examining officer:

(d)	give the examining officer on request any document which he has with
him and which is of a kind specified bv the officer.

Schedule 7, paragraph 6 gives an examining officer the power to stop and detain a
person subject to examination under paragraph 2, for up to 9 hours.

Schedule 7 paragraph 8 gives an officer the power wide search powers in relation to
the person under examination:

8(1) An examining officer who questions a person under paragraph 2 may, for the

purpose of determining whether he falls within section 40(1 )(b) -

(a)	search the person;

(b)	search anything which he has with him, or which belongs to him, and
which is on a ship or aircraft;

(c)	search anything which he has with him, or which belongs to him, and
which the examining officer reasonably believes has been, or is about
to be, on a ship or aircraft;...

Schedule 7, paragraph 11 gives an officer the power to retain any item found on a
search, for up to 7 days. There is no apparent restriction on the copying of
information from the material seized (e.g. phones, computers etc.):

11(1) This paragraph applies to anything which -

(a)	is given to an examining officer in accordance with paragraph 5(d);

(b)	is searched or found on a search under paragraph 8; or

(c)	is examined under paragraph 9 (power to examine goods arriving in
UK).

(2) An examining officer may detain the thing -

(a) for the purpose of examination, for a period not exceeding seven days
beginning with the day on which the detention commences...

Schedule 7, paragraph 18 creates criminal offences for any person failing to comply
with the above obligations;

18(1) A person commits an offence if he -

(a)	wilfully fails to comply with a duty imposed under or by virtue of this
Schedule,

(b)	wilfully contravenes a prohibition imposed under or by virtue of this
Schedule, or

(c)	wilfully obstructs, or seeks to frustrate, a search or examination under
or by virtue of this Schedule.

(2) A person guilty of an offence under this paragraph shall be liable on summary

conviction to -

(a)	Imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months;

(b)	A fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale;

(c)	Both.

42.	Schedule 8 of TACT also sets out further provisions for the treatment of persons
detained under Schedule 7: a detained person shall be deemed to be in legal
custody through the period of his detention; fingerprints and non-intimate samples
may be taken from detained persons without his consent.

The Code of Practice9

43.	A Code of Practice10 11 has been issued pursuant to paragraph 6(1) of Schedule 14 of
the TACT. A failure to observe a provision of the Code shall not, of itself, make an
examining officer liable to criminal or civil proceedings.11 The current Code was
issued in 2009, and contains Notes for Guidance1. These are expanded upon in a
Practice Advice’,12 also issued in 2009.

» Paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 of the Code deal with Examination Powers.

* Paragraphs 21 and 21 of the Code deal with detention. The Notes for
guidance state ‘Detention will be required usually where a person refuses to co-
operate and insists on leaving..,

Statistics and Reports on the use of Schedule 7

44.	In October 2012, the Home Office published the most recent statistics relating to
examinations under Schedule 7 of TACT.13 They included the following information:

(1)	A total of 63,902 persons were stopped at ports in 2011/12 in Great Britain
under Schedule 7 powers.

(2)	96% of those stopped were held for less than one hour. 4% were held for
more than one hour. This was consistent with the previous two years.

^ Bundle X/ Tab X

10	The current version of the Code was issued in 2009. it includes Notes for Guidance’ which are further
expanded in a Practice Advice' also issued in 2009.

11	TACT Schedule 14, paragraph 6(1)

12	Bundle X/ Tab X

13	Bundle XI TabX

45.	The Independent Reviewer on Terrorism Legislation, David Anderson QC, has also
reported on the use of Schedule 7, setting out a number of issues that have caused
concern. His latest report was published in June 2012. Chapter 9 of that report deals
with the use of Schedule 7 of TACT.14

GROUND 1: MISUSE OF STATUTORY POWER

46.	The decision to detain, question and search the Claimant involved an unlawful
exercise of the statutory powers under Schedule 7 of TACT.

47.	Paragraph 2 of Schedule 7 makes it clear that the power to stop, question and detain
an individual is to be exercised for the purpose of determining whether he appears to
be a person failing within section 40(1)(b)\ A person falling within section 40(1 )(b) is
a person who... is, or has been, concerned in the commission, preparation or
instigation of acts of terrorism’.

48.	' Terrorism’, for these purposes, is defined by section 1 of the Act as action designed
to influence the government or intimidate the public and which is done for the
purpose of advancing a political, religious, racial or ideological cause. It includes
serious violence against the person; serious damage to property; endangering a
person’s life other than that of the person committing the action; creating a serious
risk to the health or safety of the public or a section of the public; or is designed
seriously to interfere with or seriously to disrupt an electronic system.

49.	In the absence of any other explanation, Schedule 7 powers appear to have been
exercised in relation to the Claimant not for that purpose, but in order to retrieve the
material in his possession which may have originated from Mr Snowden; and/or to
question the Claimant in relation to his involvement in those disclosures.

50.	The following provides a strong inference that that the use of Schedule 7 powers was
for the purpose of obtaining sensitive material and information from the Claimant and
not for the purposes related to terrorism with which Schedule 7 powers are
concerned:

24

Bundle X/ Tab X

(1)	That inference is consistent with the public explanation given by the First
Defendant on 20 August 2013:

(a)	The First Defendant appeared to focus on the use of the power to
retrieve sensitive information that had been ‘stolen’, and not on the
whether the individual concerned is, or has been concerned in the
commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism.

(b)	A person in possession of highly sensitive, ‘stolen’ information may or
may not be committing an offence in relation to the Theft Act 1978, the
Official Secrets Act 1989 or some other statutory provisions. However,
the possession of even highly sensitive classified material that has
been ‘stolen’ by a ‘whistleblower’ is not, of itself, involvement in the
commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism.

(2)	The Security Services’ interaction with The Guardian as described by its
editor, gave no suggestion that the Defendants, or any other public authority
believed that someone involved in the possession or publication of material
derived from Mr Snowden was involved in terrorist activity. Their approach is
inconsistent with a genuine belief by the Second Defendant’s officers that the
Claimant was involved in terrorist activity. Conversely, it is consistent with the
indication given to The Guardian that the relevant authorities would use the
powers available as a means to regain possession of highly sensitive
material.

(3)	The lengthy questions put to the Claimant by the officers exercising Schedule
7 powers did not suggest that he was or may have been involved in the
commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism. They focused on
the journalistic activities on Mr Greenwald and others and assistance the
Claimant provided to them. This appears to be inconsistent with officers
investigating whether the Claimant was a terrorist as defined by section
40(1 )(b), but is consistent with them seeking to obtain sensitive material from
him and discover his involvement in publication of such material.

For all of the above reasons, the Defendants erred in law in using Schedule 7 powers
to obtain data and information from the Claimant. The powers were not used Tor the
purpose of determining whether he appeared to be a person ...who... is, or has
been, concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism’.

52.	Further or alternatively, even if the Second Defendants' officers did possess a wide
discretion in their use of Schedule 7 powers, for the reasons outlined above, they
exercised that power for a purpose beyond the statutory intention for which it was
granted by Parliament:

(1)	It is a long-established principle of United Kingdom public law that statutory
powers must be used for the purpose for which they were conferred and not
for some other purpose' (R (Lumba) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2011] UKSC 12, [2012] 1 AC 245.16.

(2)	A statutory power may not be used for an object outside its intended purpose,
no matter how much that object may appear to the decision maker to be in
the public interest (Stewart v Perth and Kinross Council [2004] UKHL 16 at
[28]; Pyx Granite Co, Ltd. v Ministry of Housing and Local Government [1958]
1 QB 554 at 572).

(3)	Schedule 7 is intended to facilitate inquiries aimed at discovering whether the
person being questioned is personally involved in the commission,
preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism. This narrow statutory purpose is
plainly not intended to facilitate inquiries aimed at discovering whether a
person has been involved in the commission of non-terrorist offences - for
example a breach of the Official Secrets Act unconnected to any terrorist
activities - still less is it intended to be used as a mechanism for gaining
access to journalists’ and others’ private information merely because
journalists are passing through a UK port.

(4)	There is no suggestion that Parliament could have intended that Schedule 7
powers could be used for the primary purpose of obtaining journalistic
material in circumstances that would strip the individual concerned from all
the protections he would normally have from having to answer questions or
provide access to that material:

(a) Under English law a number of legal mechanisms are available to a
public authority that wants to obtain confidential information held by a 15

15 per Baroness Hale at [199].

26

journalist, including application to the Crown Court for a production
order.

(b)	Each of those mechanisms contains explicit safeguards that are
designed to provide appropriate protecting for the confidentiality of
journalistic material, and to prevent disproportionate infringements of
journalists’ Article 10 rights

(c)	For example, the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE)
enables public authorities to apply for search warrants or production
orders that enable the police to search premises and seize property
and comupterised information connected with the commission of
criminal offences.

(d)	Under PACE some classes of material are subject to additional
protection from seizure. These include legally privileged material,
journalistic material and certain types of material held in confidence.

(e)	Special procedure material’ is defined in section 14 of PACE and
includes journalistic material and material acquired in the course of a
trade, profession or similar and which is held subject to a duty of
confidence. Schedule 1 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
sets down conditions for the police to apply to court for a warrant to
compel a person to hand over (or to seize) special procedure material,
if certain conditions are met.

(5)	These requirements are deliberately intended to include protections that
safeguard journalistic material and ensure that any attempt to interfere with
such material is subjected to independent judicial oversight.

(6)	Similar provisions are contained in Schedule 5 to the Terrorism Act 2000.
Broadly, in terrorist cases the court can order the production or seizure of
special procedure material where the order is sought for the purposes of a
terrorist investigation; there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
material is likely to be of substantial value to that investigation; and there are
reasonable grounds for believing that it is in the public interest for the material
to be disclosed, having regard to the benefit likely to accrue to the
investigation, and the circumstances under which the person had the material
in his or her possession. These conditions are reasonably similar to those
under PACE, albeit slightly less stringent.

27

(7)	By using Schedule 7 to obtain the Claimant’s confidential journalistic
information, the Defendants bypassed the appropriate statutory regimes for
obtaining confidential journalistic information and circumvented the important
safeguards {including the requirement to obtain a court order before seizing
material) contained in those mechanisms.

(8)	The Defendants’ purported exercise of Schedule 7 powers pursued an
improper purpose and was therefore unlawful.

GROUND 2: NO JURISDICTION IN RESPECT OF TRANSIT PASSENGERS

53.	Paragraph 2 of Schedule 7 identifies the persons against whom the power to detain,
search and question may be applied (emphasis added):

2(1) An examining officer may question a person to whom this paragraph applies
for the purpose of determining whether he appears to be a person falling
within section 40(1 )(b)

2(2) This paragraph applies to a person if—

(a)	he is at a port or in the border area, and

(b)	the examining officer believes that the person's presence at the port or
in the area is connected with his entering or leaving Great Britain or
Northern Ireland or his travelling by air within Great Britain or within
Northern Ireland.

2(3) This paragraph also applies to a person on a ship or aircraft which has arrived
at any place in Great Britain whether from within or outside Great Britain or
Northern Ireland.

The Second Defendant’s officers did not believe that the Claimants presence at Heathrow
was connected with his ‘entering or leaving’ Great Britain

54.	English law distinguishes between ‘entry’ and ‘arrival’ in the United Kingdom. This
distinction is expressly recognised in s 11(1) of the Immigration Act 1971, which
provides (emphasis added):

A person arriving in the United Kingdom by ship or aircraft shall for purposes
of this Act be deemed not to enter the United Kingdom unless and until he
disembarks, and on disembarkation at a port shall further be deemed not to
enter the United Kingdom so long as he remains in such area (if any) at the
port as may be approved for this purpose by an immigration officer; and a
person who has not otherwise entered the United Kingdom shall be deemed
not to do so as long as he is detained, or temporarily admitted or released

28

while liable to detention, under the powers conferred by Schedule 2 to this Act
or by Part III of the immigration and Asylum Act 1999 or section 62 of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 or by section 68 of the
Nationality, immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

55.	A person who arrives at an airport in Great Britain from a foreign country does not

‘enter’ Great Britain or Northern Ireland unless and until they pass through

immigration control, in R v Naiilie [1993] 1 AC 674 at 680 Lord Slynn stated:16

A person arriving by air at Heathrow does not enter the United Kingdom when
he disembarks. Nor, contrary to the appellant’s argument, has he entered
when he proceeds towards immigration control having passed the transit
corridor, thereby evincing an intention to go through immigration rather than
to seek to go to a foreign destination.... a person in my opinion is not seeking
to enter within the meaning of the Act when he disembarks. He seeks to enter
when he presents himself to the immigration officer or when he tries to pass
out of the area of immigration control without presenting himself to the
immigration officer.

56.	Accordingly, an individual passing through Heathrow as an international transit
passenger does not enter' the United Kingdom unless during the course of transit he
passes through immigration control.

57.	The fact that international transit passengers do not ‘enter' the United Kingdom is
reflected in s 41 of the Asylum and Immigration Act 1999. This empowers the
Secretary of State to require ‘transit passengers' to hold a transit visa. 'Transit
passengers’ are defined by s 41(2) as ‘persons of any description.. who on arrival in
the United Kingdom pass through to another country without entering the United
Kingdom’.

58.	In addition, Schedule 7 itself recognises a distinction between ‘entering’ and ‘arriving’
in Great Britain. Paragraph 1(3)(b) states that a place shall be treated as a port for
the purposes of Schedule 7 if an examining officer believes that the person...has
arrived there on disembarking from a ship or aircraft. This falls to be contrasted with
paragraph 2(b), which applies where an examining officer believes that the persons
presence at the port is connected with his entering or leaving Great Britain or
Northern Ireland.

59.	According to the established precepts of statutory interpretation, if Parliament
employs two similar but different expressions in the same piece of legislation, it is

i6 At 680

taken to intend different meanings to attach to each expression. In Trustee Solutions
Ltd v Dubery [2006] EWHC 1426 (Ch), [2007] 1 All ER 308, for example, Lewison J
held that the expressions 'notice under hand’ and 'notice under writing’ were intended
to bear different meanings since, ‘One would naturally expect the two different
phrases to have two different meanings'.

60.	It is therefore clear that, for the purposes of Schedule 7, 'entering’ the United
Kingdom is not the same as ‘arriving’ in the United Kingdom. Moreover, Parliament
appears to have had Parliament had the framework of immigration control under the
Immigration Act 1971 in mind when enacting the Terrorism Act 2000. (For example,
section 53, which gives effect to Schedule 7, makes express reference to the 1971
Act, providing in ss 53(3) that the ‘powers conferred by Schedule 1 shall be
exercisable notwithstanding the rights conferred by section 1 of the immigration Act
197V. Paragraph 15(3) of Schedule 7 also makes express reference to the 1971
Act.)

61.	Accordingly, a person who arrives at an airport in Great Britain as a passenger in
international transit does not enter’ Great Britain for the purposes of paragraph 2 of
Schedule 7 unless they pass through immigration control.

62.	The Claimant was detained by the police while he was moving through the transit
corridor shortly after disembarking from his flight from Berlin. The First Defendants’
officers were aware the Claimant was due to join a connecting flight to Rio de Janeiro
without leaving the international transit zone at the airport. At no point did the
Claimant pass through immigration control at Heathrow. It follows that at no time was
the Claimant’s presence at Heathrow 'connected with his entering.,.Great Britain1.
Nor, in the circumstances, could the Defendants' officers have entertained a rational
belief to that effect. As a result, there was no statutory basis for exercising Schedule
7 powers against the Claimant during his passage through the airport.

The First Defendant’s officers did not believe that the Claimant's presence at Heathrow was

connected with his travelling by air within Great Britain or within Northern Ireland1.

63.	The natural reading of the expression travelling by air within Great Britain or within
Northern Ireland1 in paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 7 refers to individuals who are
travelling on internal domestic flights. This is distinct from passengers in transit who
are travelling through’ Great Britain.

30

64.	The Claimant derives support for this interpretation from paragraph 2(3) of Schedule
7 of TACT, which draws a deliberate distinction between journeys ‘within' Great
Britain or Northern Ireland and journeys ‘outside1 Great Britain or Northern Ireland:

This paragraph also applies to a person on a ship or aircraft which has
arrived at any place in Great Britain or Northern Ireland (whether from within
or outside Great Britain or Northern Ireland)1

65.	The word within’ appears to refer to ships and aircraft arriving on domestic routes,
while outside’ refers to ships and aircraft travelling on international routes.

66.	This distinction is similarly reflected in paragraph 9 of Schedule 7 of TACT, which
confers a power to examine goods for the purpose of determining whether they have
been used in the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism:

9(2) This paragraph applies to—

(a)	goods which have arrived in or are about to leave Great Britain or
Northern Ireland on a ship or vehicle, and

(b)	goods which have arrived at or are about to leave any place in Great
Britain or Northern Ireland on an aircraft (whether the place they have
come from or are going to is within or outside Great Britain or Northern
Ireland).

67.	Again, the word 'within' appears to refer to journeys that start and end in Great Britain
or Northern Ireland.

The Claimant was not a person on a ship or aircraft...1

68.	The Claimant was stopped while in transit having disembarked from the plane in
which he landed. Accordingly, paragraph 2(3) does not apply.

31

GROUND 3: THE USE OF SCHEDULE 7 iS INCOMAPTIBLE WITH FUNDAMENTAL
RIGHTS

69.	Some or all of the submissions on which the Claimant would rely are already the
subject of judicial consideration in several cases including one in which judgment is
imminent:

s In DPP v Beghal CO/3047/2012 the Appellant was stopped pursuant to
Schedule 7 of TACT on arriving into Birmingham from France. She refused to
answer questions in the absence of her solicitor. She was prosecuted and
convicted pursuant to paragraph 18 of Schedule 7.

She appealed by way of case stated, submitting that her prosecution was an
abuse of process and in breach of her fundamental rights pursuant to Articles
5, 8 and 6 and her right to freedom of movement.

The appeal was heard in March 2013. Judgment will be handed down on
28 August 2013.

• In Malik v UK Application No 32968/11 the Applicant was stopped and
detained at a UK airport pursuant to Schedule 7. He applied to the ECHR on
the basis that the use of Schedule 7 was in breach of his fundamental rights
pursuant to Article 5 and Article 8.

He did not bring domestic proceedings, on the basis that seeking a
declaration of incompatibility would not be an effective remedy.

After considering submissions, including submissions on whether he had
exhausted domestic remedies before making his application, the Fourth
Section of the ECtHR declared his application admissible on 28 May 2013.
His case awaits further consideration by that Court.

^ In Elosta v Commisserioner of Police for the Metropolis (2013) CO/1422/2013
the Claimant challenged the operation of guidance and statutory provisions
pursuant to Schedule 7 that enabled police officers to delay or prevent access

32

to a solicitor when exercising coercive powers. Permission to bring judicial
review was granted in July 2013 and a hearing is listed for October 2013.

Articles 5, 8 and 8

70.	Given the cases mentioned above, in which the fundamental rights of persons
subjected to Schedule 7 powers are in issue and awaiting trial or judgment, the
Claimant does not rehearse in detail the submissions relating to those rights.

71.	In particular, the Claimant is aware that any submissions made at this stage will have
to be reconsidered in light of the judgment by the Divisional Court in DPP v Beghai,
due to handed down on 28 August 2013.

72.	In very brief summary, the Claimant submits, in relation to those rights:

(1)	The powers under Schedule 7 are not restrained by the need for reasonable
grounds for suspicion. They are not in accordance with law in that they do not
contain sufficient safeguards against abuse. The Claimant relies in this case -
as the Appellant has in DPP v Beghai - on the decision on Gillan v UK which
is in contradiction with the decision of the Judicial Committee of the House of
Lords in R (Gillan) v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [2006] 2 AC
307.

(2)	The Claimant further submits that coercive questioning without adequate
safeguards is in breach of the Claimant’s fundamental rights pursuant to
Article 6.

The Claimant reserves the right to add to the submissions on those grounds
in light of the judgment in DPP v Beghai and points raised in the cases of
Maiik v UK and Eiosta v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis.

73.	Importantly, none of the above cases engage the freedom of expression under Article
10 and the use of Schedule 7 in the context of journalistic material. Accordingly, the
Claimant makes more detailed submissions about the breach of fundamental rights
pursuant to Article 10 that are engaged in his case. These are set out below.

Articie 10

Protection of sources and journalistic material

74.	The Defendants’ actions in seizing the Claimant’s confidential journalistic material
and subjecting him to compulsory questioning in relation to his journalistic activities
violated Article 10.

75.	Article 10 provides:

Freedom of expression

1.	Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include
freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas
without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers. This Article
shall not prevent States from requiring the licensing of broadcasting,
television or cinema enterprises.

2.	The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and
responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or
penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society,
in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the
protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of
information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and
impartiality of the judiciary.

76.	The case law of the Strasbourg Court repeatedly emphasises the importance of
protecting journalists’ sources. In Goodwin v UK (1996) 1 BHRC 81 the Court stated:

Protection of journalistic sources is one of the basic conditions for press
freedom, as is reflected in the laws and the professional codes of conduct in a
number of contracting states and is affirmed in several international
instruments on journalistic freedoms (see amongst others the Resolution on
Journalistic Freedoms and Human Rights, adopted at the 4th European
Ministerial Conference on Mass Media Policy (Prague, 7-8 December 1994)
and the Resolution on the Confidentiality of Journalists' Sources by the
European Parliament of 18 January 1994 (OJ 1994 C44, p 34)). Without such
protection, sources may be deterred from assisting the press in informing the
public on matters of public interest. As a result the vital public watchdog role
of the press may be undermined and the ability of the press to provide
accurate and reliable information may be adversely affected. Having regard to
the importance of the protection of journalistic sources for press freedom in a
democratic society and the potentially chilling effect an order of source
disclosure has on the exercise of that freedom, such a measure cannot be
compatible with art 10 of the convention unless it is justified by an overriding
requirement in the public interest.’

34

77.	In his concurring judgment, Judge De Meyer emphasised that:

The protection of a journalist's source is of such a vital importance for the
exercise of his right to freedom of expression that it must, as a matter of
course, never be allowed to be infringed upon, save perhaps in very
exceptional circumstances,,.’

78.	The Court recently restated these principles in Financial Times v United Kingdom
(2009) 28 BHRC616:

The court reiterates that freedom of expression constitutes one of the
essential foundations of a democratic society and that, in that context, the
safeguards guaranteed to the press, are particularly important. Furthermore,
protection of journalistic sources is one of the basic conditions for press
freedom. Without such protection, sources may be deterred from assisting the
press in informing the public on matters of public interest. As a result, the vital
'public watchdog' role of the press may be undermined and the ability of the
press to provide accurate and reliable reporting may be adversely affected.
Having regard to the importance of the protection of journalistic sources for
press freedom in a democratic society and the potentially chilling effect that
an order for disclosure of a source has on the exercise of that freedom, such
a measure cannot be compatible with art 10 unless it is justified by an
overriding requirement in the public interest (see Goodwin v UK (1996) 1
BHRC81 at para 39).

79.	These principles are reflected in Recommendation no R(2000) 7 on the right of
journalists not to disclose their sources of information adopted by the Committee of
Ministers of the Council of Europe on 8 March 2000. The Recommendation has been
expressly relied on by the ECtHR when considering the application of Article 10 to
cases involving attempts to obtain confidential journalistic information (see, for
example, Voskuil v The Netherlands (2007) 24 BHRC 306 at [65]; Telegraaf Media
Nederland Landelijke Media BV v Netherlands (2012) 34 BHRC 193 at [86]).

80.	The Recommendations lay down a number of Principles concerning the right of
journalists not to disclose their sources of information'. These include rights of non-
disclosure applicable to journalists and other persons involved in the collection and
distribution of journalistic material:

Principle 1 (Right of non-disclosure of journalists)

Domestic law and practice in member States should provide for explicit and
clear protection of the right of journalists not to disclose information identifying
a source in accordance with art 10 of the Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter: the convention) and
the principles established herein, which are to be considered as minimum
standards for the respect of this right.

35

Principle 2 {Right of non-disclosure of other persons)

Other persons who, by their professional relations with journalists, acquire
knowledge of information identifying a source through the collection, editorial
processing or dissemination of this information, should equally be protected
under the principles established herein.

The Recommendation imposes strict restrictions on the circumstances in which the
rights to non-disclosure may be infringed:

Principle 3 {Limits to the right of non-disclosure)

a.	The right of journalists not to disclose information identifying a source must
not be subject to other restrictions than those mentioned in Article 10,
paragraph 2 of the Convention. In determining whether a legitimate interest in
a disclosure falling within the scope of Article 10, paragraph 2 of the
Convention outweighs the public interest in not disclosing information
identifying a source, competent authorities of member States shall pay
particular regard to the importance of the right of non-disclosure and the pre-
eminence given to it in the case law of the European Court of Human Rights,
and may only order a disclosure if, subject to paragraph b, there exists an
overriding requirement in the public interest and if circumstances are of a
sufficiently vital and serious nature.

b.	The disclosure of information identifying a source should not be deemed
necessary unless it can be convincingly established that:

/. reasonable alternative measures to the disclosure do not exist or
have been exhausted by the persons or public authorities that seek
the disclosure, and

//. the legitimate interest in the disclosure clearly outweighs the public
interest in the non-disclosure, bearing in mind that:

—an overriding requirement of the need for disclosure is
proved,

—the circumstances are of a sufficiently vital and serious
nature,

—the necessity of the disclosure is identified as responding to
a pressing social need, and

—member States enjoy a certain margin of appreciation in
assessing this need, but this margin goes hand in hand with
the supervision by the European Court of Human Rights.

c.	The above requirements should be applied at all stages of any proceedings
where the right of non-disclosure might be invoked.

The Recommendation expressly prohibits the use of search and surveillance powers
intended to circumvent journalists’ right not to disclose information identifying a
source:

Principle 6 {Interception of communication, surveillance and judicial
search and seizure)

a. The following measures should not be applied if the terms of these

principles, not to disclose information identifying a source:

i, interception orders or actions concerning communication or
correspondence of journalists or their employers,

//. surveillance orders or actions concerning journalists, their contacts
or their employers, or

iii. search or seizure orders or actions concerning the private or
business premises, belongings or correspondence of journalists or
their employers or personal data related to their professional work.

b. Where information identifying a source has been properly obtained by
police or judicial authorities by any of the above actions, although this might
not have been the purpose of these actions, measures should be taken to
prevent the subsequent use of this information as evidence before courts,
unless the disclosure would be justified under Principle 3.

83.	In light of these principles, the ECtHR has adopted an expansive interpretation of the

r|	concept of a ‘journalistic source’. In Telegraaf Media Nederland Landeiijke Media 8V

v Netherlands the Court stated that (emphasis added):

The court's understanding of the concept of journalistic 'source' is ’any person
who provides information to a journalist1: it understands ’information
identifying a source’ to include, as far as they are likely to lead to the
identification of a source, both ’the factual circumstances of acquiring
information from a source by a journalist’ and ’the unpublished content of the
information provided by a source to a journalist’ (see Recommendation No
R(2000) 7 on the right of journalists not to disclose their sources of
information (quoted in para 61, above)...

84.	The ECtHR has held that Article 10 requires states to establish stringent procedural
safeguards in any statutory regime that enables public authorities to obtain material
from journalists. The Court’s case law makes it clear that a failure to provide such
safeguards will inevitably violate Article 10.

I

85.	In Sanoma Utigevers 8V v The Netherlands (2010) 30 BHRC 318 the Grand
Chamber of the ECtHR held that a Dutch law which empowered the police to force
journalists to surrender material to the police for use in criminal investigations
violated Article 10.

86.	The applicant was the publisher of a Dutch motoring magazine. Two of the
applicant’s journalists attended an illegal street race and took photographs of the
participants on condition that the participants’ identities would be kept secret. The
applicant intended to publish an article about illegal car races, which would be
accompanied by photographs edited in a way that concealed the identity of all the
participants. The police, who had opened a criminal investigation into the illegal

37

street race, subsequently exercised a power under Dutch law requiring the applicant
to surrender the photographs. The police threatened to detain the magazine’s editor
if he did not comply with the order.

Before seizing any material the public prosecutors sought the intervention of an
investigating judge. Under Dutch law, the investigating judge had no power to
sanction or prevent the police from searching the applicant’s premises or seizing the
material. The Judge nonetheless indicated that, had he had power to do so, he would
have sanctioned a search and seizure. In light of these actions, the applicant
surrendered under protest a CD containing unedited photographs of the participants
in the illegal race. The public prosecutor formally seized the material. The applicant
subsequently obtained an order from the Dutch Regional Court preventing the police
and prosecution from taking cognisance or making use of the information obtained
through the CD, and ordering the CD to be returned to the applicant.

The applicant contended that the Dutch authorities1 actions violated Article 10.

The Grand Chamber explained that Article 10 is engaged whenever a journalists is
compelled to assist in the identification of confidential sources:

71. While it is true that no search of seizure took place in the present case, the
court emphasises that a chilling effect will arise whenever journalists are seen
to assist in the identification of anonymous sources (mutatis mutandis,
Financial Times Ltd v UK (2009) 28 BHRC 616 at para 70).

72. In sum, the court considers that the present case concerns an order for
compulsory surrender of journalistic material which contained information
capable of identifying journalistic sources. This suffices for the court to find that
this order constitutes, in itself, an interference with the applicant company’s
freedom to receive and impart information under Article 10.

The Grand Chamber went on to conclude that the interference with the Applicant's
Article 10 right was not ‘prescribed by law1 because the powers exercised by the
Dutch authorities, although enshrined and exercised in full compliance with domestic
law, were not accompanied by ‘adequate legal safeguards’ to enable 1an independent
assessment as to whether the interests of the criminal investigation overrode the
public interest in the protection of sources’. The Court held that the Dutch framework
violated the principle of quality of law’ even though the legal power to remove the
Applicants journalistic material had an accessible statutory basis in Dutch law.

91.	in reaching that conclusion, the Grand Chamber explained that (emphasis added):

88.	Given the vital importance to press freedom of the protection of journalistic
sources and of information that could lead to their identification any
interference with the right to protection of such sources must be attended with
legal procedural safeguards commensurate with the importance of the principle
at stake.

89.	The court notes that orders to disclose sources potentially have a detrimental
impact, not only on the source, whose identity may be revealed, but also on the
newspaper or other publication against which the order is directed, whose
reputation may be negatively affected in the eyes of future potential sources by
the disclosure, and on members of the public, who have an interest in receiving
information imparted through anonymous sources (see, mutatis
mutandis, VoskuH v Netherlands (2007) 24 BHRC 306 at para 71).

90.	First and foremost among these safeguards is the guarantee of review bv a
judge or other independent and impartial decision-making body. The principle
that in cases concerning protection of journalistic sources ’the full picture
should be before the court' was highlighted in one of the earliest cases of this
nature to be considered by the convention bodies (BBC v UK(App no
25798/94) (admissibility decision, 18 January 1996); see para 54, above). The
reguisite review should be carried out bv a body separate from the executive
and other interested parties, invested with the power to determine whether a
requirement in the public interest overriding the principle of protection of
journalistic sources exists prior to the handing over of such material and to
prevent unnecessary access to information capable of disclosing the sources'
identity if it does not.

91.	The court is well aware that it may be impracticable for the prosecuting
authorities to state elaborate reasons for urgent orders or requests. In such
situations an independent review carried out at the very least prior to the
access and use of obtained materials should be sufficient to determine whether
any issue of confidentiality arises, and if so, whether in the particular
circumstances of the case the public interest invoked by the investigating or
prosecuting authorities outweighs the general public interest of source
protection. It is clear, in the court's view, that the exercise of any independent
review that only takes place subseguently to the handing over of material
capable of revealing such sources would undermine the very essence of the
right to confidentiality.

92.	Given the preventive nature of such review the judge or other independent and
impartial body must thus be in a position to carry out this weighing of the
potential risks and respective interests prior to any disclosure and with
reference to the material that it is sought to have disclosed so that the
arguments of the authorities seeking the disclosure can be properly assessed.
The decision to be taken should be governed bv dear criteria, including
whether a less intrusive measure can suffice to serve the overriding public
interests established. It should be open to the judge or other authority to refuse
to make a disclosure order or to make a limited or qualified order so as to
protect sources from being revealed, whether or not they are specifically
named in the withheld material, on the grounds that the communication of such
material creates a serious risk of compromising the identity of journalist's
sources (see, for example, Nordisk Film & TV A/S v Denmark (App no
40485/02) (admissibility decision, 8 December 2005)). In situations of urgency,

39

a procedure should exist to identify and isolate, prior to the exploitation of the
material by the authorities, information that couid lead to the identification of
sources from information that carries no such risk (see, mutatis
mutandis, Wieser v Austria [2007] ECHR 74336/01 at paras 62 - 66).

The Grand Chamber’s judgment in Sanoma Utigevers BV v The Netherlands

establishes that:

(1)	Article 10 is engaged whenever a person is compelled to provide information
or material that may result in the identification of a confidential journalistic
source.

(2)	Any interference with the protection given to journalistic sources ‘must be
attended by legal procedural safeguards commensurate with the importance
of the principle at stake’.

(3)	The principal safeguard that the law must provide is 'the guarantee of review
by a judge or other independent and impartial judicial decision making bodÿ.

(4)	The reviewing body must be separate from the parties and must have power:

(a)	to determine, before any material is handed over, a requirement in the
public interest overriding the principle of protection of journalistic
sources exists prior to the handing over of such material and

(b)	to prevent unnecessary access to information capable of disclosing
the sources“ identity if there is no overriding public interest.

(5)	In order to meet the requirements of Article 10, the independent review must
take place before material is handed over. A system where the independent
review only takes places after material is handed over1would undermine the
. very essence of the right to confidentiality.

(6)	In every case where a public authority seeks to obtain confidential journalistic
material, it should be open to the judge or independent reviewer to prevent
disclosure of the material or to limit the information that may be provided.

(7)	The requirement to protect sources applies even where sources are not
expressly named in the material sought to be obtained.

(8)	in urgent situations, :a procedure should exist to identify and isolate, prior to
the exploitation of the material by the authorities, information that could lead
to the identification of sources from information that carries no such risk'.

93.	In Sanoma Utigevers BV the police were exercising their powers in full compliance
with the requirements of Dutch domestic law. The terms of the domestic statute were
accessible’. The authorities’ decision to seize the applicant’s journalistic materia! was
referred to an independent judge acting in an advisory capacity, who indicated that
he fully supported the police's decision to remove the material. Nevertheless, the
Court described the powers as (scarcely compatible with the rule of law'.

94.	By contrast, Schedule 7 TACT contains no legal procedural safeguards’ whatsoever
in relation to the seizure and analysis of confidential journalistic material. There is no
mechanism for independent review of decisions by the police to remove and examine
confidential journalistic material. It follows that Schedule 7 manifestly fails to meet the
stringent requirements laid down by the Grand Chamber in Sanoma Utigevers BV.

Protection of journalists' sources under English law

95.	The importance of protecting journalistic material, and ensuring that any attempts to
obtain access to such material are subjected to rigorous judicial oversight, are
reflected in section 10 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981, which prevents a court
from ordering a person to disclose the source of information contain in a publication
for which he is responsible unless the court is satisfied that disclosure is necessary in
the interests of justice or national security or for the prevention of disorder or crime.
They are also reflected in a long line of domestic authorities (see, for example, X Ltd
v Morgan-Grampian (Publishers) [1990] 2 All ER 1; Ashworth Hospital Authority v
UGH Ltd (2002) 12 BHRC 443; Mersey Care NHS Trust v Ackroyd (No. 2) [2007]
EWCA Civ 101) as well as the additional protections afforded to journalists; sources
in legislation such as PACE.

36. The English courts have emphasised the importance of ensuring that attempts to
compel journalists to disclose confidential material take place in accordance with the
law and give full weight to Article 10. in R (Malik) v Manchester Crown Court [2008]
EWHC 1362 (Admin), [2008] 4 All ER 403 Dyson LJ emphasised that:

The importance of the right and the weight of the justification required for an
interference that compels a journalist to reveal confidential material about or
provided by a source has been frequently stated both in Strasbourg and in

41

our courts, it is sufficient to refer to Goodwin v UK (1996) 1 BHRC 81 (paras
39 and 40) '[protection of journalistic sources is one of the basic conditions
for press freedom' and 'limitations on the confidentiality of journalistic sources
call for the most careful scrutiny by the Court’; Tillack v Belgium App no
20477/05 (27 November 2007, unreported) (para 53); John v Express
Newspapers [2000] 3 Ail ER 257 at 265, [2000] 1 WLR 1931 at 1939 (para
27) where the court of appeal said: 'Before the courts require journalists to
break what a journalist regards as a most important professional-obligation to
protect a source, the minimum requirement is that other avenues should be
explored'; and Ashworth Hospital Authority v MGN Ltd [2002 UKHL 29 at
[61],[2002] 4 All ER 193 at [61], [2002] 1 WLR 2033 where Lord Woolf CJ
said that disclosure of a journalist's sources has a chilling effect on the
freedom of the press and that the court will 'normally protect journalists’
sources'.

97.	Dyson LJ identified the approach that the court must adopt whenever the court is
asked to make an order compelling a journalist to provide confidential journalistic
information:

The correct approach to the art 10 issues as articulated in both the
Strasbourg jurisprudence and our domestic law emphasises that (i) the court
should attach considerable weight to the nature of the right interfered with
when an application is made against a journalist; (ii) the proportionality of any
proposed order should be measured and justified against that weight and (iii)
a person who applies for an order should provide a clear and compelling case
in justification of it.

Application of principles in the present case

98.	The decision to seize the Claimant’s journalistic material constituted an infringement
of the Claimant’s rights under Article 10(1).

99.	For the reasons explained above, the infringement of that right was not ‘in
accordance with law1 for the purposes of Article 10(2). Nor did it pursue a legitimate
objective or represent a proportionate restriction on the Claimant’s right. Unlike the
regime for obtaining production orders under Schedule 5 of TACT, Schedule 7
contains no mechanism for independent judicial oversight before journalistic material
is seized and examined by the police. The Schedule 7 regime therefore fails to
comply with the legal safeguards identified by the Grand Chamber in Sanoma
Utigevers BV. In addition, the fact that journalistic material may be seized for
examination without prior warning or explanation is likely to have a seriously chilling
effect on the ability and willingness of journalists to travel to and from the United
Kingdom.

100.	For all these reasons, the coercive powers under Schedule 7 and their application
against the Claimant violate Article 10.

INTERIM RELIEF

101.	The principles governing the grant of interim relief in judicial review proceedings are
well established.

102.	As in private law actions, the court must assess whether the balance of convenience’
favours the grant of interim measures. In considering this question, the court ‘shall
choose the course which, in all the circumstances, appears to offer the best prospect
that eventual injustice will be avoided or minimised’. (R v Secretary of State for
Transport, ex p Factortame Ltd (No. 2) [1991] 1 All ER 70, Per Lord Goff at 107).

103.	In National Commercial Bank Ltd v Olint Corporation Lid [2009] UKPC 16, [2009] 1
WLR 1405 the Privy Council summarised the principles applicable to the balance of
convenience as follows:

16.	The purpose of [an interim] injunction is to improve the chances of the court
being able to do justice after a determination of the merits at the trial. At the
interlocutory stage, the court must therefore assess whether granting or
withholding the injunction is more likely to produce a just result...

17.	The basic principle is that the court should take whatever course seems likely
to cause the least irremediable prejudice to one party or the other. ..

18.	Among the matters which the court may take into account are the prejudice
which the plaintiff may suffer if no injunction is granted or the defendant may
suffer if it is; the likelihood of such prejudice occurring; the extent to which it
may be compensated by an award of damages or enforcement of the cross-
undertaking; the likelihood of either party being able to satisfy such an award;
and the likelihood that the injunction will turn out to have been wrongly granted
or withheld, that is to say, the court’s opinion of the relative strength of the
parties’ cases.

104.	In the present case the Claimant will clearly suffer irremediable prejudice if the court
does not grant an interim injunction to prevent the Defendants from disclosing,
transferring, distributing or interfering with his confidential journalistic material. The
very purpose of these proceedings is to protect the confidentiality of that material and
to vindicate the Claimant's right not to have his journalistic material unlawfully seized,
disrupted and shared with third parties.

105.	On the other hand, the Defendants will not suffer significant prejudice if a temporary
injunction is granted. The Defendants’ public statements say that the objective of
seizing the material was to prevent the Claimant from communicating it to third parties.
Granting an interim injunction would not compromise that objective.

106.	In the circumstances of this case, the objective of 'holding the ring’ until the
substantive hearing and avoiding irremediable prejudice to either party requires the
court to grant interim relief in the terms sought by the Claimant, in particular, the
Claimant asks the Court to make the following order that:

(1)	The Defendants shall not disclose, transfer, distribute or otherwise interfere
with the data and other materials that were seized from the Claimant on 18
August 2013, pending determination of these proceedings.

(2)	if the Defendants have granted possession of or access to the data seized
from the Claimant to any other public authority or third party, either in the
United Kingdom or abroad, the Defendants shall:

(a)	Disclose the identity of each of those parties to the Claimant and
confirm the material disclosed; and

(b)	Take reasonable steps to obtain undertakings that the third
party/parties will not disclose, transfer, distribute or otherwise interfere
in any way with the data pending the determination of these
proceedings.

44

PERMANENT RELIEF

107.	At the conclusion of this claim the Claimant will ask the court to grant the following

relief:

(1)	A declaration that the Defendants1 actions in detaining, questioning and
searching the Claimant and seizing his property were unlawful.

(2)	A mandatory order requiring the Defendants to destroy ail data seized from
the Claimant (including all copies of seized data) and to recall any of the
Claimant’s data that has been transferred to third countries.

(3)	A declaration that the Defendants’ actions violated the Claimant’s rights under
Articles 5, 6, 8 and 10.

(4)	Payment of damages for unlawful detention and damages for breach of the
Claimant’s Convention rights under s 8 of the Human Rights Act.

(5)	A declaration of incompatibility under s 4 of the Human Rights Act in respect
of Schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act 2000.

(6)	Further or other relief.

CONCLUSION

108.	For the reasons outlined above, the Claimant invites the Court to:

(1)	Grant his application for permission to bring judicial review proceedings against
the Defendants; and

(2)	Grant interim relief in the terms sought in the draft order.

Matthew Ryder QC	21 August 2013

Edward Craven

Raj Desai

Matrix Chambers