A selection of the major QFDs

Name	Description	Questions Answered	Physical &ude*Cheh
AUTOASSOC	BuU unsdccted TDI-TDI correlations with confidence scores.	What other TC*s belong to your target ? What technologies your target is using ?	2»1 instances, each SO70TB storage
Evolved Mutant Broth	Identify »hen certain TOIs appear in traffic which indicate target usage and their location. Telephony and C2C data provide a converged view.	Where has my target been?  What kind of communications devices has my target been using?	1D»S instances, each 70TB storage
Hard Assoc	Provide strongly correlated selectors for both C2C and Telephony traffic taken from TDIs appearing n the same packet	Are there any alternative C2C or Telephony selectors for my target?	3»2 instances, each 70TB storage
HRMap	Host-rcferrer relationships • information about how people get to websites, including Inks folowed and direct accesses.	How do people get to my website of interest and where do they go to next ?  What wcbsrtcs have been visaed from a gwen IP?	S*3 instances, each 70TB storage
KARMA  POUCE	Whtch TDIs ha»« been seen at approximately the same time, and from the same computer, as voits to websites.	Which websites your target visits, and »hen/where those visits occurred.  Who visas suspicious websites, and when/wticre those visits occurred.  Which other websites are vented by people who visit a suspicious website.  Which IP address and web browser were being used by your target when they vented a website.	11»7 instances, each 70TB storage, 3»1 correlator instances
SOCIAL  ANTHROPOID	Converged comms events allowing you to see who your targets have communicated with via phone, over the nternet, or usng converged channels (e.g. sending emails from a phone or makng voice cals over the internet).	What commiaiications your target is engaged in. Who has your target been communicating with. What commimications have occurred using a particular locator (IP address, cell tower, etc).	&»3 instances, each 70TB storage

26/3/2012 Ref: 18171507

UK TOP SECRET STRAP 1

5