		Bank of England	
GCO Name(s)	3CHQ Top level Aim with Customer		BANK MISSION
	Contribute to Bank decision-making on issues affecting UK economic stability.		To support UK economic stability.

Top (five) Objectives in 08-09

1. Continue provision of intelligence relating to risks to UK economic stability

Bank Current Headline Issues	GCHQ Areas of Impact
Global credit crunch, Risks of major operational disruption to the UK's financial markets (or foreign financial infrastructure on which it relies, such as Euroclear, Clearstream, SWIFT), China & SWFs	Provision of EPR to support Bank decisions on UK economic stability, particularly regarding economic policy & developments in G10 countries. EPR on electronic attack to help Bank assess risk to UK financial infrastructure. Good line of STRAP 3 reporting in Autumn 08.
GCHQ Products and Services	
1. EPR	

SECONDE	ES	
		

Posts people (names)	IGCHQ Le jds(s)	[Major issues and targets for 08-09	[APR done	[Traffic	light

Governor |Mervyn King	|DI	|	|	|

Deputy  Governor,  Financial  Stability	Sir John Gieve Andrew Bailey Stuart Allen	DHINT/GCO  DHINT/GCO  DHINT/GCO	
Chief  Cashier			
STRAPSO			
			

		Cabinet Office & Number 10	
GCO Namefs)	GCHQ Top level Aim with Customer		CABINET OFFICE MISSION
	Cabinet Office is assured of GCHQ's effective governance and financial management and recognises our role as a critical member of the Whitehall policy-making community; The PM recognises and values GCHQ’s contribution to the UK’s National Security		To make Government work better by (i) supporting the Prime Minister, (ii) supporting the Cabinet and (iii) strengthening the civil service

Top Objectives in 08-09

1.	Agreement and successful implementation of an IA governance regime that recognises CESG’s role as National Authority and puts IA where it needs to be on the
Government agenda

2.	Our (still fragile) representation at Cabinet Office-led foreign policy meetings is strengthened and success maintained through the turn over of Heads of
intelligence

3.	GCHQ responds more consistently and coherently to Cabinet Office demands for technical expertise on issues relating to interception, IA and the Internet

4.	As a result of the Constitutional Reform Bill, GCHQ is aligned constitutionally with SIS and BSS and suffers no impact to its operations.

5.	In support of Cabinet Office and as lead Agency, GCHQ drives forward the UK’s response to CNCI

6.	Bring influence to bear on HMG and international (in particular EU) legislation, policies and strategies and to ensure continuing GCHQ operations, outcomes and
added value

7.	Director GCHQ hosts a visit by the PM to Cheltenham

Cabinet Office Current Headline Issues	GCHQ Areas of Engagement
Service transformation (eGovenment etc); Data handling review; Problems facing the SCOPE programme; Review of the JIC R&P process; Constitutional Reform	In helping to inform and shape Government Policy - As a key contributor to the JIC and intelligence assessment process - As a partner in determining the future for Agency or IA Governance, funding and oversight - In helping to deliver Government’s response to crises - In ensuring that GCHQ interests/equities are acknowledged in the drafting, or application, of UK and EU legislation - As a partner in progressing the future of SCOPE

		and its associated programmes - In ensuring ISR act as SO informed Champion Of Agency interests in dealings with HMT - In ensuring the Cabinet Office finance team to represent accurately Agency interests through the Parlianrientaiy estimate and vote and through HMTs in-year management processes	
GCiHQ Products and Services			
1. EPR 2. Tip-offs 3. Policy input 4. Technical support 5. In year performance reporting			
SECONDEES			
(Assessment Staffs): (ISRG PREVENT); (CSIA)			

(Posts IPeople names \ 1		aansiff me	«■	Major issues and targets for Q&-GS	fraffic light
PM	Gordon Brown	Director			
PUS	Jeremy Haywood	Director			
PS for foreign affairs	Tom Fletcher		\GCO	1	
APS for foreign affairs	Niclk Catsaras		<GCO	1	
PS for home affairs and justice	Simon King				
PS for PREVENT. CT CLG, BERR and Economic	Not cleared				
SPAD	Matt Cavanagh |	?			
SPAD	Michael Jacobs	?			
SPAD	Justin Forsyth:	?			
SPAD	Stuart Wood	?			
Chief operating officer	Eric Hepburn		^GCO	f	
STRAPSO tm leader	John Groves		i(GCO	\	
SoS	Ed iMilliband	Director			

Hd of the Home Civil Service	Gus O'Donnell	Director		
PM's National Security Advisor	Robert Hannigan	Director		
PM's Foreign Policy Advisor	Simon McDonald	Dl on behalf of DGO		
PM's international, economic & european policy advisor	Jon Cunliffe	Dl		
Head of intelligence assessment and chairman of the JIC	Alex Allen			
Director, Central  Intelligence  Assessment	Tim Dowse	Dl		
Director, Security and Intelligence	Chris Wright	dp/dia/^^^H		
Head of the Propriety & ethics team	Sue Grey	DB		
Director Pay	Chris Johnson	DB		
Legal advisors and CoCAD				
HdofCSIA	Roger Styles			
Director General, ODSec	Margaret Aldred	Dl		
Hd, transformational government and Cabinet Office management	Alexis Cleveland	Director		
Parliamentary Counsel Office				
Director, SCOPE	Michael Taylor			
				

		DCLG	
SCO Narneís)	3CHQ Top level Aim with Customer		MISSION
	Develop their engagement with the PREVENT (specifically the intelligence) community and promote A for Local Government		Building Resilient Communities

Top (five) Objectives In 08-09

l! ImpfÔVà 6t
day ló day

ip (SöS, PermSee, DG) with SECRET PREVENT (Dl,

3: Develop mechanism for delivery of IA fût* Local Government

our understanding; cf how intelligence fits in their

Current Headline Issues	GCHQ Areas of impact
1: Communities survey of 15,000 to 20,000 2: Relevance of traditional Siglnt 3: Political crisis between role as Senior Reporting!?) Department for SECRET PREVENT and Communities* '"soft government“ profile 4: Internet	1: Bulk removal of extremist material from internet 2: Co-ordination and cooperation over PREVENT community activities 3; contributing party to PREVENT 4: Home Secretary's Weekiy Security Meeting
GCHQ Products and Services	
1i: EPR 2: Tip-offs 3: non-rasident GCQ service 4: SIT cannaelivity 5: IA consultation 6: PREVENT activity planning tnpul	

second.ee

08-tS

SoS

eoglejname&j

¡ääMEElHQ

Hazel Blears

Dir. Dl

or Issues and

targets

tor os-aa

issues: Political shift away from FEU engagement with SECRET PREVENT Targets: 11:
improve engagement fron^onununities Senior Leadership (5oS> PermSec, DG< D) with
SECRET PREVENT	2: lAeducatlon

APR done

Traffic ii



PermSec Peter Housden

IDG

Cohesion

and

Resilience

D Cohesion David Williams

H/PEU

Delivery

Manager

Business

Manager

Agency

Liaison

Susan Scholefield

Jonathan Freeman

Jenan Hasan

Campaign

and

Marketing

DSO/

STRAPSO

D/DSO /
STRAPSO

Daniel Greaves
Louise Boyle
d Whiting

Ian Pyott
Peter Usher

Dir, Dl

Dl, H/Int CT

PREVENT Co-
ordinator

PREVENT Co-
ordinator

PREVENT Co-
ordinator

GCO

GCO

GCO

GCO, CAM, CESG
St rat

GCO, CAM, CESG
St rat

Issues: Political shift away from PEU engagement with SECRET PREVENT Targets:	1:

Improve engagement from Communities Senior Leadership (SoS, PermSec, DG, D) with
SECRET PREVENT (Dl, BHHHI) 2: ,A education

Issues: Tension between role as Senior Responsible Officer for SECRET PREVENT and
aolitical direction from SoS for moderation of PEU engagement with SECRET PREVENT.
Targets:	1: ImDrov^naaaement from Communities Senior Leadership with SECRET

PREVENT (Dl,	2: IA education

ssues: Political shift away from PEU engagement with SECRET PREVENT Targets:	1:

Improve engagement from Communities Senior Leadership (SoS, PermSec, DG, D) with
SECRET PREVENT (Dl, ■■■¡¡1) 2: IA education

ssues: Lack of exposur^^nteMigenc^ncnnexperience in the usage of it. Target: Focused,
education

Issues: Very busy. Delegated most of his engagement with agencies. Targets: IA education

ssues: None Targets: IA education
Issues: None Target: IA education
ssues: None Targets: IA education

ssues: separate building to delivery staff. Targets: IA partnership
ssues: separate building to delivery staff. Targets: IA partnership

		Children, Schools & Families (DCSF)	
GCO Name(s)	3CHQ Top level Aim with Customer		MISSION
	Maintain conduit through to Ed Balls		To make England the best place in the world for children and young people to grow up

[l^Promotior

Top (five) Objectives in 08-09

1: Promotion and delivery of IA service (I

I) 2: Ensure appropriate participation in PREVENT community 3: Ensure delivery of reporting service on radicalisation (I

Current Headline Issues				GCHQ Areas of Impact			
				None - mostly satisfied by JTAC and Assessment Staff assessment pieces			
GCHQ Products and Services							
1:EPR 2:no	n-resident ad-hoc GCO service						
SECONDEE							
							
Posts	People (names)	GCHQ Le<|ds(s)	Major issues and targets for 08-09			APR done	Traffic light
SoS	Ed Balls	None					
PermSec	David Bell	None					
	Hermione Gough	None					

RESTRICTED

		DECC	Annex B2to DIR/3264/1506/3/1,2 July 08
SCO Warned	3CHO Tod level Aim with Customer		raiWssiorJ	 '
	Work with DECC to influence UK energy policy and prevent damaging climate change.  Afark with DECC to enable them to manage business information risk effectively and help ihem assist their		
			To ensure the supply and efficient use of clean, safe and competitively priced energy and manage
	:on stiLuen ciesicomm uni t ies		•nerav liabilities and tackle the twin - olobal - ctialknoe-s of enerovr Mcuritv and climate chan«.

Tnp Objectives in 08-09

1. Develop relationship with Secretary of Stale's office-by providing .regular .briefings ora how intelligence is influencing UK energy policy.>(HINT]i 2. Support DEC-Cthrough period erf turmoil during establishment and building move. >|DHINT) 3L Work
with DECC to-develop plans, for provision of secure IT in 3-5 Whitehall Place to meet read or requirement’s (ITSD)r d. Support DECC's objectives: in meshing climate change and energy security policy (OPt*T5l}.

A: D-fivulop sernior relationships in order to develop a clear view of future requirements Iran, and relationships with. DECC

BERR Current Headline Issues



uiiiHUii fui^h mu un ^ ^uimy uy ingoing uuun igny-fyyi piagugim

consumers to promote investment, transparency and open, competitive markets.
Avoiding dangerousofimate change by achieving international consensus on emissions

targets through the UNFC-CG process, encouraging the dCVciopmcnt of renewable
energy technologies and giving oil producers a stake ¡in renewable energy by
encouraging them to invest petrodollars, in renewable technologies.

IA: ¡Developing proper informa tram risk posture for DECC and ail its subordinate

jCHQ-Areas of impart

srovision of timely intelligence to support DECC objectives on: the ¡intentions of Russia as an energy supplier. Reactions of energy producers to--the London
inengy Meeting and subsequent process. Attitudes of key countries to climate change and the UMFCCC process. How the economic situation is affecting
attitudes to tnvesSment in energy and renewable technologies. Iran; negotiating positions in the IAEA process. Provision of IT support and expertise on
ntroducing secure IT to-Whitehall Place.

A Customer Engagement

GCHQ Products and Services

1. EPR 2-Tïp-üfm. 3. Policy input
A: TEA

¡SECONDEES

i*osls-	People (namo3l		jCHQ Le ads i si	Major issues and targets ior|QB-jQ9	fraffi-c light
5oS	Ed Miliband. PPS Rory	TDc-nne-ll	Dtr&clor/Di	Develop relationship, providing intelligence support to key events and demonstrating how Siigink makes a difference to the work of the international energy and climate change teams.	
PUS BERR	Moira Wallace		Orr&clor		

Climate  Change  Minister	Joan Ruddock	Director/DI	Develop relationship, providing intelligence support to key events and demonstrating how Sigint makes a difference to the work of the international energy and climate change teams.	
Energy  Minister	Mike O'Brien	Director/DI/DDI	Develop relationship, providing intelligence support to key events and demonstrating how Sigint makes a difference to the work of the international energy and climate change teams.	
DG  International Energy & Climate Change	Graham White	HINT		
Energy team	John Neve	HINT/DHINT/IP  T	Develop relationship, providing intelligence and working with the energy team to develop UK energy policy.	
Climate team	Chris Dodwell	HINT/DHINT/IP  T	Develop relationship, providing intelligence and working with the climate team to support UK objectives.	
Climate team	Jan Thompson	HINT/DHINT/IP  T	Develop relationship, providing intelligence and working with the climate team to support UK objectives.	
CIO		IA	Discussion to develop understanding of lAservice and relationships needed	
SIRO		IA	Discussion to develop understanding of lAservice and relationships needed	
DSO		IA		
Accreditor		IA		
ITSO		IA	But please don't view the ITSPasour main contact)	

HgcoT

ällMttl



DEFRA

jtajnbjnservices- on nicha requirements.

¡iïsSÎBT

J vina within -our Environmental Means

	Top (five) Objectives in 08-09
1: Apply pressure to Climat^jirect orate io have their seniors DV cleareçn* G-C.HQ representatives 3: IA promotion and delivery i^gj|||||	2; Maintain service level - monitor DEFRA staff movements and ensure effective handovers for

Current Headline Issues	GCHQ Areas of Impact
1: Climate change PSA 2: Common Agricultural Policy 3: CBRN contingency worts under PREPARE 4; lack of cleared seniors in climate- directorate 5:Carbon trading 6: low JIC priority of majority of interests	1: Support on DEFRA's work with International Whaling Commission esp since FCO stopped working this topic, [Anything of significant impact under SAXLINGHAM?] 2: Insight on Climate negotiations
GCHQ Products áñd: Services	
1 :EPR (mostly 5-Eyes reissue) 2: non-re-sicfent GCO service 3: engagement on cross government dimata change work	

SECONDEES	
	

Posts

People tnäffifrs)

sos

Perms ec

Hilary Benin
Helen Ghosh

IGCHQ Lêâjâô

Mm

laior issues àrtd targets for 08-09

j^PR done ^1

raffic light

D (Chief Vet)

DG Marine &
RiSfrerikS

DG Environment
Protection

DG Food and
Farming

D Whaling

D Risk and
Atmosphere

D/DtCG

D/D tCC

Head Crisis
Management

Whaling

Nigel Gibbens

Rodney Anderson

Michael Anderson

Andy Lebrecht

Richard Cowan
Henry Derwent

Chris Dodwell

Jan Thompson

Tcnhy Nixon

Trevor Perfect

^ew incumbent not DV'd. Internal candidate brought in very quietly at a lower grade than
previous incumbent but same pay

ssues: Low impact of intelligence Targets; Monitor and Maintain
SSueS: Not Cleared Targets: encourage to be vetted

ssues; Low frequency of intelligence Targets; Monitor and Maintain- Respond to ad hoc
animal disease pandemics

ssues; None Targets: fultest possible support for the UK delegation at IWC
ssues; Not cleared Targets: encourage to be vetted

ssues; 1: Jan Thompson is a more informed reader and preferable contact Targets: General
aducation on intelligence

ssues: None Targets: Monitor & Maintain

ssues; None Targets: iultest possible support for the UK delegation at IWC

		DfID	
GCO Name(s)	GCHQ Top level Aim with Customer		DfID MISSION
	Key player in HMG foreign agenda. Maintain good relationships and good interactions, providing all feasible yet proportional support, intelligence, IA, training and education.		Leading the British Government's fight against world poverty

Top (five) Objectives in 08-09

1: Identify/Create desk level linkages across all areas of concern for DfID by end 08 (GCO + D/Hints and IPTs) 2: Develop relationships with country Directors, DG Country Projects and PermSec
(GCO+ H/Ints and DI) 3: Streamline reporting provision and cement feedback processes bySept08(GCO + 6/Hints) 4: Promote the early delivery of country strategies to intelligence services by
end 08 (GCO + H/Ints) 5: Ensure delivery of IA awareness to all DfID colleagues by mid 09 (	)

DfID Current Headline Issues	GCHQ Areas of Impact
Conflict prevention PSA (Africa and Pakistan focus), Climate Change, Corruption and good governance (Iraq, Afghanistan, SSA, Pk), Humanitarian crisis in Burma	Afghanistan/Pakistan Political and security reporting. Support to BDC. Iraq/Iran Political and security reporting. Zimbabwe electoral process, UN reporting.
GCHQ Products and Services	
1. Summary EPR 2. SIS/GCHQ joint reports 3. Senior verbal briefings 4. Active GCO service 5. Training + education at the desk and as courses (ie Users of SigInt) 6. IA	

SECONDEES

3osts

3eople (names)



APR done

Traffic light

SolS

pf.-nSc l:

OG Country
Projects

0 East &
Central Africa

Douglas Alexander
Minouche Shafik
Mark Lowcock
3ave Fish

0 West &
Southern Africa

3everiey Warmington

0 Pan-Africa
Strategy

Marcus Manuel

0 Eur.ME.
Americas C&L
Asia

D S Asia

Chief Scientist

H/MENAD

'l/lraq

5ue Warded
Jim Drummond
Gordon Conway
Michael Anderson
3arb Hendrie

Afghanistan

PREVENT

Pakistan

Burma

Support to BDC

Andy Leigh
<enny Dick
Jennifer Leith
Richard Tilbrook

Andrew Kenningham

Dl

Dl

Dl

Mery little time to read material. Noticeably reduce volumes of reporting to SoS

Very little time to read material. Frustrated by volumes of 'tactical' intelligence reaching her
desk. Targets is covered by Objective 3 )

Yo intelligence service in previous post

ssues: Skills in handling intelligence material need developing Targets: desk level training
n processes and intelligence risks

		ECGD	
GCO Namefs)	3CHQ Top level Aim with Customer		ECGD MISSION
	Continue to contribute to ECGD decision-making on financial and political risk.		To support UK investment overseas by providing Government-backed underwriting service.

Top (five) Objectives in 08-09

1. Continue provision of intelligence relating to risks to UK investment overseas

ECGD Current Headline Issues	GCHQ Areas of Impact	
Global credit crunch & how thyis will affect projects overseas. Advance of warning of countries in financial trouble is crucial.	Provision of EPR to support ECGD decisions on credit risk in key markets.	
GCHQ Products and Services		
1. EPR 2. Provision of off-site storage for back-up SIT disk.		
SECONDE ES		

Posts__

Executive

Director

Credit

Risk

Peogl^names^

GCHQ Lejdsls)

Wajonssue^nçHarget^bMJS^fê

Patrick Crawford

Dl

APR done

n¡affi^icj¡n

Group

David Havelock

DHINT/GCO

Head of
BD1

(Aerospac

e&

Defence)

Head of
BD2

Gordon Welsh

DHINT/GCO

(Energy &

Mnin9) Roger Gotts

Head of
BD3

(Infra struct
ure,

Telecoms,

Transport)

_________Anthony Faulkner

DHINT/GCO

DHINT/GCO

RESTRICTED

		FCO	Annex B1 to D]RJZ264n506/3/1,2 July 08
pCO Name(s)	SCHO Top level Aim	with Customer	:CQ MISSION
	Continue to build relationship Into a true partnership {FCO understanding of. and support for. GCHQ‘s operational requirements; effective use of Intelligence by FCO; collaboration which makes		Better World. Better Britain (A flexible Global Network serving: the whole of the British Government. Essential services that support the
	aosskble an Increasingly active contribution by GCHQ (both Slglnt and IA) in helping FCO achieve Its desired outcomes).		British economy, support British nationals abroad, support managed •nigraElon to Britain. Policy Goals to counter terrorism, weapons jroliferatlon and their causes: prevent and resolve conflict: promote a ow carbon, high growth, global economy; develop effective nternatlonal Institutions, above all the UN and EU)
			
Top (five) Objectives In QB-09			

Ensure- mat GCHQ and FCO warr&niry and! submission procedures are fitter purpose given Increased complexity and need for pace In our work.	Hflnts. Private Office. GCO FCO) 2. Contribute to

development offulur-e iT systems to allow FCO to make most effective use -of Intelligence 3. Maximise Slgint's contribution to the achievement of FCO!s^eslre7outccme9 (Routinely invited; to all appropriate policy
meetings: timely access to policy papers: Identify possible effects opportunities: X.GSI connectivity) 4. Achieve better Integration of Slglntand IA services to FCO 5. Greater level of routine oontact between GCHQ
and FCO seniors, and map members of FCO SLF to their SLflA Interests.

FCO1 Current Headline Issues	GCHQ Areas of impact
Vary with, world: events, but currently include;) Zimbabwe, Afghanistan, Iraq. Iran, Pakistan, Kosovo. Chlna/TIbet. Delivering the new strategic framework with consequent organisational and resource adjustments. Delivery of FI recrest 3rd Generation (F3G). Future handling of Intelligence through IT. (Pius concentration on people, money management, improving buildings, communication, working practices)	Provision of Elmely products, services and advice to Inform and Influence FCO- Policy formulation and Implementation. A awareness and FCCTs ability to defend Its network. Future IT. Improve FCO’s appreciation of. and ability to make effective use of. Intel I Igence.
GCHQ Products and Services	
1. EPR 2. Tip-offs 3. Tailored wltten and face to face briefings A Policy Input 4 GCOs in FCO and theatre. 5. Technical support 6. IA services, advice and support	

SECONDEES

Posts

Ups DG Political).

LOTA)

3Qople (namfrsi

3CHQ LeJdsi*

Vlalor issues and targats for 09-10

Traffic light

Soffi

PUS

hft.-xfsi&r of State

tJinfsier of State

t/i.vst&r of State

David Miliband
Peter Ricketts
Bill Rammeii
ord Malloch-Brown
Caroline Flint

Director
Director

>i, HINTS. GCO' FCO
>l. HINTS, GCO FCO

GCO FCO

Remain a trusted ally; maintain frequency of Director 1-2-1s; visit Cheltenham In early 200$

31 -I ais s uocessf ul Vis It to Che Itenha m by mid 2ÙÙÙ
Promote benefits -of Intelligence, enable delivery, establish joint briefing: sessions with SIS. arrange visit to HQ ln SflOfl
Promote benefits of Intelligence, enable delivery, establish Joint briefing; sessions with SIS
Promote benefits -of Intelligence, enable delivery, establish Joint briefing: sessions with SIS. arrange visit to

PUSS	Gillian Men on	gco fco	^remote benefits of Intelligence, enable delivery, establish Joint briefing; sessions with SIS. arrange visit to t	Q In 2009
PPSSPS to Ministers	Hatthew Gould, David HacFarland. Stephen -liekey, Catherine Brooker	Dir Private OfficefCOS, GCO FCO	Haintain relationship with Matthew. Continue to Improve access and visibility In Private Offices. Better access to Ministerial-level meetings organised by Private Offices	
DG Defence and trrtettigence	Harlot Leslie	DG Ops. Dl	Bulk! relationship between Marlot and! DG OPs. Establish regular catch-up sessions Monthly?), use Palmer 5-t for better effect. More contact with Dl.	
DG PotkiGBi	Hark Lyall Grant	Dl	Haintain relationship with regular senior contact. Look for opportunities for "Active Diplomacy”	
DG Europe ana Stab atisaftore	5.1 mon Fraser	H/lnl	Win confidence by following his diary and briefing at key times	
Chief iniormaho n Officer	Tony Mather	DG IA and Tr DIA, GCO FCO	3ulkJ le vel of IA advice and support: active Invol vement In FCO High classification IT systems and! next generation secure telephony	
Special Represe-ofaHive				
4ig^3ro-sia n/Pakistan	5-herard Cowper-toles	GCO FCO	Sulid relationship, establish flow of Intelligence (read folder) - Initial focus on Pakistan	
Director International tnstuBons	knwhar Choudhury	HINT ?	3ulld relationship GCO FCO).	
Dir Defense era Strategic Threats	5-lmon Manley	Dl. Hints	Haintain strong relationship. Monitor intelligence service (one of few active senior users o# Fortress)	
Dir Africa	*uJam Wood		3ulld strong relationship. Arrange visit to HQ at early stage	
Dir European Politest				
Affairs	Finn Hitchens		3ulW new relationship. Deliver visit to HQ and to Ay Nik for next visit to Cyprus	
DirGtobateod	Deborah Bronnert			
Economic Issue s	i Vicky Bowman		Sulld strong relationship with successor	
Dir Asia Pacific	3oom Wlghtman	Hint	good relationship already in place due to previous post - maintain.	
Dir O/erseas Territories	Dolln Roberts	Hint	Colin Is new - Build relationship	
Dir Americas	John Rankin		3ulld relationship	
Dir RuSSGAD	Hichael Davenport		Haintain	
DirMEJ-iA	John Jenkins		Haintain	
Oir intemationaf Secanfy	^aul Johnston	Hint	Positive about intelligence. Build relationship	
Dir South Asia end Afghanistan			HMA Islamabad designate - Generally supportive of submissions but could be more so. Maintain and. If aosslble, strengthen relationship -	
	fcdam Thomson			
Leqat Adviser	Daniel Bethlehem	>LA	Haintain already strong relationship	
Dir Security and Estates	Andrew Noble	>IA		
Head WLD	»fa-cant	Head Ops Policy, Dl,  Hint GCO FCO		
'ran Co-ordinator	Antony Phil Upson	Hints	Haintain	
HMA Kanul	Hark Sedwili	>1, Hint. GCO Afghanistan	Discussion with GCO FCO staff and visited HQ in March 09	
H/AA Bayingi	William Furman	>1. Hint		
HMA Moscow	tone Pringle	Dl. Hint	Srlef before taking up Fost (October)	
HMA Baghdad	Christopher Prentice	>1, Hint, GCO Iraq		
HMA Baghdad Designate	John Jenkins	>1. GCO FCO	3rlef before- taking up post (July?)	
HiAA ¡siamabsxf	iobert Brinkley	>1. Hint. GCO Alkene		
HiAA Tehran	ilmon Gass	Hint	Arrange briefing when back In UK	
JKMfS NY	John Sawers	Dl. Hint. GCO NY		
JKDEL NATO	ituart Eldon	Hint. GCO Mons		

		FSA	
GCO Name(s)	3CHQ Top level Aim with Customer		FSA MISSION
	to provide value from FSA-funded post in serious crime team providing intelligence on serious instances of fraud, insider dealing and market manipulation or distortion which involves or threatens UK interests		

Top (five) Objectives in 08-09

1. Continue bringing new incumbent of above post up to speed 2. Maintain productivity on FSA-tasked insider dealing operation and COLP-tasked boiler room operations 3. Get Philip
Robinson (Director Financial Crime) down to Cheltenham (Visits office).

FSA Current Headline Issues	GCHQ Areas of Impact
Sovereign Wealth Funds, global financial instability, terrorist financing, Russian, Chinese and Lithuanian attempts to penetrate the UK banking/financial markets	Provision of timely EPR to inform FSA regulation of UK financial sector. Advice on use of intercept in "fit and Droper" decisions and laE implications. Sigint leads on an insider dealing operation have given a much greater understanding of the issues, directly influenced the direction of the investigation and led to further FSA collaboration with SOCA. GCHQ reporting on boiler rooms has led to some very tangible outcomes including the addition of companies to the list of unauthorised firms on FSA's website on the basis of only one consumer complaint of they have corroborating information from Sigint and (through COLP) the disruption of those involved in boiler room fraud, including a number of arrests and the seizure of criminal assets.
GCHQ Products and Services	
1. EPR 2. Support on laE issues.	

SECONDE	ES	
		

Posts	People (names)	GCHQ Le^ds(s)	Major issues and targets for 08-09	APR done	Traffic light
CEO	Hector Sants	Dl			
Head of Financial Crime & Intelligenc  e	3hilip Robinson	HINT	Visit to Cheltenham		
					

		Health	
GCO Name(s)	GCHQ Top level Aim	with Customer	MISSION
	Monitor for Ad Hoc requirements and ensure timelv service as required		Ensure better health and well-being, better care anc better value for all.

	Top (five) Objectives in 08-09
1: Promotion and delivery of IA service (■■■	2: Monitor for Ad Hoc requ irements and ensure timely service as required

Current Headline Issues				GCHQ Areas of Impact			
				None			
GCHQ Products and Services							
1:EPR ¿:no	n-resident ad-hoc GCO service						
SECONDEE							
							
Posts	3eople (names)	GCHQ Leids(s)	Major issues and targets for 08-09			APR done	Traffic light
SoS	Alan Johnson	None					
PermSec	Hugh Taylor	None					
Chief  Medical  Officer	Sir Liam Donaldson	None					

t

		Ministry of Justice	
GCO Name(s)	GCHQ Top level Aim with Customer		MISSION
			Strengthen democracy, rights and responsibilities; Deliver fair and simple routes to civil and family justice; protect the public and reduce reoffending; ensure a iiore effective, transparent and responsive criminal
	Work closely with them on political and legal initiatives to ensure viability of GCHQ's mission		ustice system for victims and the public
			
Top (five) Objectives in 08-09			

1: Promotion and delivery of IA service (I

I) 2: Assess requirement for non-residential GCO service (I

Current Headline Issues	GCHQ Areas of Impact
1: Intercept as evidence 2: 3rd Party	None- GCHQ is impacted by Justice
GCHQ Products and Services	

None

SECONDEE>

Posts

People (names)

GCHQ Le&sjs)

Major issues and targets for 08-09

APR done	Traffic light
	

		Transport (TranSec)	
GCO Name(s)	GCHQTop level Aim with Customer		MISSION
	Maintain Siglnt service		Transport that works for everyone. A transport system which balances the needs of the economy, the environment and society	

	Top (five) Objectives in 08-09
1: Promotion and delivery of IA service (	2: Monitor for Ad Hoc requirements and ensure timely service as required 3: Maintain EPR service from ITT

Current Headline Issues	GCHQ Areas of Impact
1: Airport Security 2: Threats, terrorist or otherwise, to transport infrastructures around the world 3: International security situations 4: Indications that preventative measures taken deter attacks	
GCHQ Products and Services	
1:EPR on Terrorist groups, targets, methods 2: non-resident GCO service 3: Targeted briefings	

SECONDEES

Posts

Head Aviation

Security

Internationa!

(Operations),

Transport

Security &

Contingencies

Directorate

PeojjleJnames^

Head Threats
and

Contingencies,
Transport
Security and
Contingencies
Directorate

D/Head Threats
and

Contingencies,
Transport
Security and
Contingencies
Directorate

Threats and
Intelligence
Desk Officer

Threats and
Intelligence
Desk Officer

Judith Ritchie

Mike Woodall

Leon Brain

Graeme Eckles

Kraig McCarthy

3CHQ Le jd~

Major issues and tarqets for 08-09	APR done	Traffic light
Issues: Continuity and regularity of London representatior^argets: Ensure regular (monthly) contact with TranSec unit +ad hoc requirements		
Issues: Continuity and regularity of London representatior^argets: Ensure regular (monthly) contact with TranSec unit +ad hoc requirements (^^^^^|)		
Issues: Continuity and regularity of London representatior^argets: Ensure regular (monthly) contact with TranSec unit +ad hoc requirements (^^^^^|)		
Issues: Continuity and regularity of London representatjorjargets: Ensure regular (monthly) contact with TranSec unit +ad hoc requirements (^^^^^|)		
Issues: Continuity and regularity of London representatior^argets: Ensure regular (monthly) contact with TranSec unit +ad hoc requirements (^^^^^|)		