CO/11732/2013

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT

IN THE MATTER OF A CLAIM FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
BETWEEN

R

on the application of

DAVID MICHAEL DOS SANTOS MIRANDA

Claimant

and

(1) SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
(2) COMMISSIONER OF POLICE FOR THE METROPOLIS

Defendants

FIRST DEFENDANT’S GROUNDS FOR OPPOSING THE CLAIM

Introduction

1. At around 0805 on Sunday 18 August 2013 the claimant arrived at Heathrow
airport on a flight from Berlin [A15], He was intending to catch a connecting
flight to Rio de Janeiro, where he lives (he is a Brazilian citizen). However, in the
international transit area at Heathrow, officers of the second defendant, acting
pursuant to Schedule 7 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (“Schedule 7”), detained him.
At 0815 the officers served the claimant with a TACT1 Notice of Examination
[B1-B2J. At 0815 the officers served him with a TACT2 Notice of Detention
[B3]. The claimant was questioned and items of his property were detained. The
detained items are listed in the Detained Property List [B3]: (i) Samsung laptop

(ii)	Samsung phone (iii) 1 x gold & 1 x silver memory stick (iv) 2 x DVDs (The
Oath My Country My Country) (v) Sony games console (vi) Smart watch (vii)

hard drive.

2.	The claimant declined the offer of a duty solicitor and instead requested his own
lawyer. That lawyer, Mr Kendall, arrived at Heathrow at 1525 and Mr Kendall
attended the claimant at 1605. The claimant was released at 1703.

3.	The second defendant has not returned any of the detained property to the
claimant.

4.	The claimant issued this claim for judicial review on 21 August 2013 [A 1 ]. In it
he claims that the detention of his person and property pursuant to Schedule 7 was
unlawful. He seeks as final relief [A45]:

(i)	a declaration that the defendants’ actions in detaining, questioning and
searching the claimant and seizing his property were unlawful;

(ii)	a mandatory order requiring the defendants to destroy all data seized
from the claimant (including all copies of seized data) and to recall any
of the claimant’s data that has been transferred to third countries;

(iii)	a declaration that the defendants’ actions violated the claimant’s rights
under articles 5, 6, 8 and 10 ECHR;

(iv)	damages for unlawful detention and damages for breach of the
claimant’s Convention rights under s.8 of the Human Rights Act 1998;

(v)	a declaration of incompatibility under s.4 of the Human Rights Act
1998 in respect of Schedule 7;

(vi)	further or other relief. 5

5.	In the claim form the claimant also sought interim relief until final determination
of the proceedings [A9]. On 22 August 2013 the Divisional Court (Beatson LJ,

2

Parker J) [2013] EWHC 2609 (Admin) [tab 5] ordered that the hearing of the
application for interim relief be listed on 30 August 2013 and that, pending the
conclusion of that hearing, the defendants shall not inspect, copy, disclose,
transfer, distribute (whether domestically or to any foreign government or agency)
or interfere with the data held by the claimant and detained pursuant to Schedule 7
save:

(i)	for the purpose of investigating whether the claimant is a person who is
or has been concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation of
acts of terrorism; or

(ii)	for the purpose of protecting national security, including by preventing
or avoiding the endangering of the life of any person or the diminution
of the counter-terrorism capability of Her Majesty’s Government,

6.	By a consent order made at a hearing on 30 August 2013, the Divisional Court
(Laws LJ, Kenneth Parker J) ordered that until the determination of these
proceedings or further order the defendants shall not copy, disclose, transfer,
distribute (whether domestically or to any foreign government or agency) or
interfere with the data held by the claimant and detained pursuant to Schedule 7
save:

(i)	for the purpose of investigating whether the claimant is a person who is
or has been concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation of
acts of terrorism or has committed an offence contrary to ss.58 or 58A
of the Terrorism Act 2000 or the Official Secrets Acts 1911 and 1989;
or

3

(ii)	for the purpose of protecting national security, including by preventing
or avoiding the endangering of the life of any person or the diminution
of the counter-terrorism capability of Her Majesty’s Government.

7.	The Divisional Court on 22 August 2013 also ordered that there be a rolled up
hearing and set a timetable for the proceedings. The Divisional Court’s timetable
was subject to the qualification that the first defendant was to notify the other
parties by 1630 on 29 August if she intended to apply for a closed material
procedure under s.6 of the Justice and Security Act 2013 and CPR Part 82. By
letter dated 29 August 2013 the first defendant infonned the other parties and the
court that, having been obliged in the intervening period to give priority to her
duty to protect national security, which had required her to devote her resources to
the examination of the detained material and to other matters such that it had not
been possible to date to conduct the necessary analysis to decide whether to apply
for a closed material procedure, she had not decided to apply for a closed material
procedure, or to make a claim for public interest immunity, but reserved the right
to do so. That remains the first defendant’s position. 8 * * *

8.	Paragraph 3 of the Order of the Divisional Court made on 30 August directed that
any application to intervene in these proceedings be made in writing, lodged with

the court and served on all parties by 1630 on 5 September 2013. On 23 August

2013 Liberty lodged an application to intervene. At the time of writing, 2 other
groups of persons, namely (i) Article 19, English PEN, Media Legal Defence

Initiative and (ii) National Union of Journalists of the UK and Ireland, MGN Ltd,
Independent Print Ltd, Index on Censorship, The International Federation of

4

Journalists, The Media Law Resource Center, have indicated an intention to
intervene but have not formally applied to do so. The first defendant proposes to
respond to the submissions of any intervener in her skeleton argument and at the
rolled up hearing.

Legal framework

9.	Section 53 of the Terrorism Act 2000 (“TA 2000”) gives effect to Schedule 7 [tab

1].

10.	Paragraph 2 of Schedule 7 permits an examining officer (which includes a
constable: paragraph 1(1 )(a)) to question a person who is at a port (this includes an
airport: paragraph 1(2)), and whose presence at the port the officer believes is
connected with his entering or leaving Great Britain, to question the person for the
purpose of determining whether he appears to be a person falling within
s.40(l)(b).

11. Section 40(1 )(b) [tab 1], read with subs.(2), refers to a person who is or has been
concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism within
the meaning given by s.l. Section 40 is, as its side note states, an interpretation
section. It defines “terrorist” for the purposes of the 2000 Act. Subsection (l)(a)
covers a person who “has committed” an offence under any of ss.ll, 12, 15-18,
56-63. 12 *

12.	Section 1 is another interpretation section. It defines “terrorism” for the puiposes

of the 2000 Act. That definition includes the use or threat of action anywhere in

5

the world that endangers another person’s life if the use or threat is designed to
influence any government or an international organisation and the use or threat is
made for the purpose of advancing a political or ideological cause: subss.(l),
(2)(c), (4)(a), (d) [tab 1], Acts falling within s. 1 may or may not, depending on the
facts of the particular case, also amount to an offence under any of the sections
listed in s.40(l)(a).

13.	An examining officer may exercise his powers under paragraph 2 of Schedule 7
whether or not he has grounds for suspecting that a person falls within s.40(l)(b):
paragraph 2(4).

14.	For the purposes of exercising a power under paragraph 2 of Schedule 7, an
examining officer may stop a person and detain him for a maximum of 9 hours:
Schedule 7 paragraph 6(1), (4).

15.	An examining officer may, for the purpose of determining whether he falls within
s.40(l)(b), search the person and anything he has with him: Schedule 7 paragraph
8(1 )(a), (b), (c). 16

16.	Any property searched or found on a search under paragraph 8 may be detained by
the examining officer (a) for the purpose of examination, for a period not
exceeding 7 days beginning with the day on which the detention commences
and/or (b) while he believes that it may be needed for use as evidence in criminal
proceedings: Schedule 7 paragraph 11(1 )(b), (2)(a), (b).

6

17.	A power conferred by virtue of the Terrorism Act 2000 on a constable (a) is in
addition to powers which he has at common law or by virtue of any other
enactment, and (b) shall not be taken to affect those powers: s.114(1) [tab 1].
Where anything is seized by a constable under a power conferred by virtue of the
2000 Act, it may (unless a contrary intention appears) be retained for so long as is
necessary in all the circumstances: s.l 14(3).

18.	A person may disclose information to the intelligence services (meaning the
Security Service, the Secret intelligence Service and GCHQ: s.21(l)) for the
purposes of the exercise by that service of any of its functions: Counter-terrorism
Act 2008 s. 19(1) [tab 2],

19.	Section 21(2) [tab 2] gives the cross-reference to those functions. They include, in
the case of the Security Service, the protection of national security and acting in
support of the activities of police forces; and, in the case of the Secret Intelligence
Service, obtaining and providing information relating to the actions or intentions
of persons outside the British Islands and performing other tasks relating to the
actions or intentions of such persons; and, in the case of GCHQ, obtaining and
providing information derived from any equipment producing electromagnetic or
other emissions or related to such emissions or equipment and from encrypted
material. The provisions of s.l9 are without prejudice to any rule of law
authorising the obtaining, use or disclosure of information by any of the
intelligence services: s.20(3).

7

20.	Information obtained by an examining officer pursuant to Schedule 7 may be
disclosed to the intelligence services pursuant to s.19 of the 2008 Act: R (CC) v
Metropolitan Police Commissioner et al [2011] EWHC 3316 (Admin) [2012] 1
WLR 1913 [tab 6] paragraph 21.

Submissions

21.	The claimant makes 4 principal complaints.

(i)	Schedule 7 does not apply to passengers in transit: paragraphs 53-68 of
the claim form grounds [A28-A31].

(ii)	Schedule 7 is incompatible with articles 5, 6, 8 and 10 of the European
Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms: paragraphs
69-73 of the claim form grounds [A32-A33].

(iii)	The use of Schedule 7 in this case was for an improper purpose:
paragraphs 46-52 of the claim fonn grounds [A24-A28].

(iv)	The use of Schedule 7 in this case breached the claimant’s rights under
articles 5, 6, 8 and 10 ECHR: paragraphs 74 [A34-A43] and 107(3)
[A45] of the claim form grounds.

22.	Before addressing those 4 complaints, the first defendant makes three preliminary
points. 23 *

23.	First, paragraph 7 of the claimant’s pre-action protocol letter of 20 August 2013
[D2] sought the return of the detained properly no later than 25 August. It is the

second defendant who detained, and who retains, the claimant’s property. The
final relief sought by the claimant includes the destruction, but not the return, of

8

the data held on the claimant’s property: paragraph 107 of the claim form grounds
[A45]. This is a tacit acknowledgment by the claimant that it is not his data.

24.	Second, the first defendant agrees that she is the proper defendant in respect of
complaints (i) and (ii). These are points of law challenging the ECHR
compatibility and the scope respectively of Schedule 7, and the first defendant is
the appropriate person to defend the legislation and is properly joined pursuant to
s.5 of the Human Rights Act 1998 and CPR 19.4A. Complaints (iii) and (iv) are
complaints about the use of Schedule 7 in this particular case, and they are
complaints about decisions of the second defendant. The police are independent
of the first defendant. The first defendant makes this point because it is the
constitutionally correct position. But the first defendant is not seeking in these
proceedings to shift responsibility on to the second defendant. On the contrary,
the first defendant liaised with the second defendant, as the second statement of
Mr Robbins makes clear. Further, in order to avoid unnecessary procedural
complications, the first defendant accepts responsibility in the present proceedings
not only for her own Department but for the acts and omissions of Her Majesty’s
Government as a whole. 25

25.	Three, there is some overlap between the 4 principal complaints, and in
consequence also in the first defendant’s submissions in response. In order to
avoid repetition, the submissions are set out below under the particular complaint
to which they most directly relate, but the first defendant’s submissions should be
considered as a whole in respect of all 4 of the principal complaints.

9

(i)	Transit passengers

26.	Paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 7 applies if the examining officer believes that the
person’s presence at the port or area “is connected to his entering or leaving”
Great Britain or Northern Ireland or his travelling by air within Great Britain or
within Northern Ireland. On both the ordinary natural reading of these words and
a purposive construction of them, they refer to a physical entering or leaving
(entry in fact).

27.	The natural reading is plain. The claimant was “at a port” (paragraph 2(2)(a)).
His presence at the port was as a result of his having flown to Great Britain from
Berlin. Anyone other than a lawyer would agree that the claimant did enter Great
Britain.

28.	The purpose, and effectiveness, of Schedule 7 would be undermined if it did not
apply to transit passengers. The claimant’s restrictive construction does not
“promote the policy and objects of the Act”: Padfield v Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and. Food [1986] AC 997, 1030c per Lord Reid. It was the physical
presence of the claimant, and of the property he had with him, that was the
relevant fact. All the reasons for having Schedule 7 powers, namely to secure
evidence which assists in the conviction of terrorists; to obtain intelligence about
the terrorist threat; to disrupt or deter terrorist activity; to recruit informants (see
paragraph 59 of the judgment in Beghal v DPP [2013] 2573 (Admin) (DC) [tab 7],
citing the 2012 Report of the Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation)
apply equally to transit passengers. The fact that a passenger may intend to travel
onward from Great Britain, whether or not he remains airside in the interim, is not

10

a reason for Schedule 7 not to apply. Indeed, in some cases the passenger’s
onward travel intentions may be part and parcel of his being concerned in the
commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism.

29.	If, as appears to be the case, the claimant contends that, while in transit at
Heathrow, he was within the jurisdiction for the purposes of article 1 ECHR and
the Human Rights Act 1998, it is paradoxical that he is simultaneously contending
that he was outside the jurisdiction for the purposes of Schedule 7.

30.	Read in context, the function of the words in paragraph 2(2)(b), “is connected with
his entering or leaving Great Britain or Northern Ireland or his travelling by air
within Great Britain or Northern Ireland”, is to confine it to (prospective)
travellers. Hence the heading to Schedule 7: Port and Border Controls. But these
controls are for terrorism, not immigration, purposes. The inclusion of persons
travelling by air within Great Britain or within Northern Ireland underlines this.

31.	The Terrorism Act 2000 itself makes clear that immigration control powers are
separate from the powers conferred by Schedule 7: Terrorism Act 2000 s.53(3),
Schedule 7 paragraph 15(3). 32

32.	The claimant relies on s.ll of the Immigration Act 1971: paragraphs 54-56 of the
claim form grounds [A28-A29]. But s.l 1 of the Immigration Act 1971 [tab 4] is
not in point here. That section concerns legal entry (entry in law), which is an
important concept in immigration control (see eg R v Naillie [1993] AC 674; R
(ST (Eritrea) v Home Secretary [2012] UKSC 12 [2012] 2 AC 135), though even

11

in that context s.l 1 is not of universal application: R v Javaherifard [2005] EWCA
Crim 3231 [2006] IAR 185 at [12] & [21] [tab 14]). But s.ll ofthe 1971 Act has
no relevance to the powers of stop and search that are the subject of Schedule 7.
Section 11(1) ofthe 1971 Act is expressly a deeming provision and s.ll expressly
applies “for the purposes of [the 1971] Act”. It does not apply for the purposes of
Schedule 7: Terrorism Act 2000 ss. 121-122 [tab 1], If Parliament had intended
s.ll ofthe Immigration Act 1971 to apply to Schedule 7, it would expressly have
so provided, as it did in s.l 1(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
2002, in respect of the British Nationality Act 1981, and in s.2(14) ofthe Asylum
and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004,

33.	Examining officers are given express power to board an aircraft which has
“arrived” to exercise their Schedule 7 powers: Schedule 7 paragraphs 2(3), 6(2)
and 15(2)(c); Schedule 14 paragraph 2, read with s.121. This is no doubt to
remove any uncertainty as to the possible special position in law of a person
aboard an aircraft. It provides no support for the claimant’s argument that
“entering” in paragraph 2(2)(b) is being used in the technical sense that applies in
the Immigration Act 1971. (ii) * * * *

(ii)	Declaration of incompatibility

34.	On 28 August 2013 the Divisional Court (Gross LJ, Swift and Foskett JJ) in

Beghal [tab 7] held that Schedule 7 is compatible with articles 5, 6 and 8 ECHR.

See in particular paragraphs 91-109, 113, 133. Article 10 ECHR was not in issue

in Beghal. Ms Beghal has applied for permission to appeal to the Supreme Court.

12

35.	The claimant acknowledged at paragraph 71 of his grounds [A33] that “any
submissions made at this stage will have to be reconsidered in light of the
judgment in [Beghaiy\ A Divisional Court will follow the decision of another
Divisional Court unless convinced that the earlier judgment is wrong: R v Greater
Manchester Coroner ex p Tal [1985] QB 67, 79e-81e (DC). It cannot sensibly be
contended that that stringent test is met here. Accordingly, the first defendant
does not make any more detailed submissions on the second complaint so far as it
alleges the Schedule 7 is incompatible with articles 5, 6 or 8 ECHR.

36.	As regards the compatibility of Schedule 7 with article 10 ECHR, the first
defendant submits as follows.

37.	The purpose of Schedule 7 is to carry out terrorism checks at a port or border. Its
purpose is not to obtain evidence to use in legal proceedings. Schedule 7 is
accordingly not comparable (in pari materia) to Schedule 5 to the Terrorism Act
2000 or to Schedule 1 to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984. In plain
English, Schedule 5 and Schedule 7 are doing different jobs. That is why
Schedule 7, in contrast to both Schedule 5 to the 2000 Act and to Schedule 1 to
PACE [tab 4], contains no provision to deal with excluded, special procedure or
legally privileged material. 38 *

38.	Schedule 5 to the 2000 Act is given effect by s.37. Section 37 is in Part IV (ss.32-

39) of the 2000 Act. Part IV is headed “Terrorist Investigations”. Section 32
defines “terrorist investigation” as the investigation of, among other things, “(a)
the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism”. In order to obtain

13

a warrant to search premises, or an order requiring a person to produce material,
under Schedule 5, a constable and a justice or circuit judge, as the case may be,
must have “reasonable grounds for believing” that the warrant or order would
yield material of substantial value to the investigation: paragraphs 1(3), (5), 2(2),
2A(1), 3(6), 6(2), 7(l)(b), 11(4), 12(2), (2A), (3), (4), 15(2), 16(1). Further,
paragraph 6(3) includes a public interest test. And paragraphs 8(l)(a), ll(3)(a),
12(2)(a), (2B), 13(2) provide that a warrant or order shall not confer any right to
production of, or access to, items subject to legal privilege. Note that Part IV and
Schedule 5 are concerned with police powers, and thus “terrorist investigations”
here means investigations by the police.

39.	Schedule 7 contains no equivalent provision. The conclusion is inescapable that
Parliament did not include such equivalent provision in Schedule 7 because
Schedule 7 is not in pari materia to Schedule 5 - and for the same reasons is not in
pari materia to Schedule 1 to PACE. 40

40.	It is true that material found on a Schedule 7 search may be used in evidence in
legal proceedings: R v Hiindal and Dhaliwal [2004] EWCA Crim 389 [2004] 2
CAR 307. But the Court of Appeal in Hundal and Dhaliwal expressly distinguish
material found on a search, on the one hand, from answers to questions or material
obtained under a production order on the other hand: [18-19]. Further, the
Divisional Court in Beghal said at [138] that “there is (currently) no specific
statutory bar precluding the introduction in evidence in subsequent criminal
proceedings of admissions obtained pursuant to a Schedule 7 examination. But, in
our judgment, it is fanciful to suppose that permission would be granted in

14

criminal proceedings for such admissions to be adduced in evidence.” See too the
Divisional Court’s further comment at [146].

41.	If, following a Schedule 7 stop, material comes to light that gives rise to a criminal
investigation, then the course of that investigation, and of any subsequent criminal
proceedings, are governed by provisions other than Schedule 7. It is those other
provisions, and not Schedule 7, that would need to be considered if any challenge
was made to the course of the criminal investigation or proceedings.

42.	The same reasoning applies in respect of use of the material that the first defendant
is currently making for the protection of national security. If any challenge is to
be made to that, it must be a challenge to those national security functions, not to
the use of Schedule 7.

(iii)	Improper purpose

43.	The claimant alleges that Schedule 7 “appear[s] to have been exercised ... in order
to retrieve the material in his possession which may have originated from Mr
[Edward] Snowden; and/or to question the Claimant in relation to his involvement
in those disclosures”: paragraph 49 of the claim form grounds [A24], The
claimant further alleges that this was done in order to “bypass the appropriate
statutory regimes for obtaining confidential journalistic information and
circumvented the important statutory safeguards (including the requirement to
obtain a court order before seizing material) contained in those mechanisms”:
paragraph 52(7) of the claim form grounds [A27-A28].

15

44.	There are two components to this second complaint. One, an allegation that the
defendants acted for a purpose outwith Schedule 7. Two, an allegation that the
defendants bypassed the statutory regimes for obtaining journalistic material.

45.	As regards the first component, the second defendant stopped, questioned and
searched the claimant under Schedule 7 for the purpose of determining whether he
appeared to be a person concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation of
acts of terrorism. Acts of terrorism include among other things the use or threat of
action that is designed to influence a government or international governmental
organisation and which endangers a person’ life. The phrase “concerned in” is a
wide one, apt to include encouraging or assisting crime (as to which, see Part 2
(ss.44-67) of the Serious Crime Act 2007). The first defendant’s reasoning is set
out in the second statement of Mr Robbins, the Deputy National Security Adviser
for Intelligence, Security and Resilience in the Cabinet Office.

46.	As regards the second component, Schedule 7 was not used in this case to bypass
statutory regimes for obtaining confidential journalistic information. The first
defendant makes four submissions on this point.

47.	One, as mentioned above, Schedule 7 is not in pari materia to Schedule 5, so the
question of bypassing Schedule 5, or Schedule 1 to PACE, does not arise. 48

48.	Two, there was at the time no terrorist investigation underway. Schedule 5
therefore had no possible application.

16

49.	Three, to the best of the first defendant’s knowledge and belief, the detained
property does not include any journalistic material. The first statement of Mr
Robbins, dated 27 August 2013, says at paragraph 6 that “no information that has
so far been analysed by Her Majesty’s Government has identified a journalist
source or has contained any items prepared by a journalist with a view to
publication. The information that has been accessed consists entirely of
misappropriated classified UK intelligence documents. I can confirm that the
disclosure of this information would cause harm to UK national security”. That
remains the position.

50.	Now, as mentioned at paragraph 45 above, the use of Schedule 7 in the present
case was for the purpose of determining whether the claimant appeared to be a
person who is or has been concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation
of acts of terrorism, such as the use or threat of action that is designed to influence
a government or international governmental organisation and which endangers a
person’s life. As explained in Mr Robbins’ statements, that action might involve
publishing or threatening to publish articles in the press which produced or
described material the unauthorised disclosure of which could harm national
security. But it does not follow that the detained material was journalistic
material.

51.	If a thief steals an unpublished manuscript from a famous novelist, intending to
publish a scoop about the forthcoming book, that does not make the manuscript
journalistic material. Why not? The thief “acquired [the manuscript] for the
purposes of journalism”: s. 13(1) of PACE. The first defendant submits that the

17

answer is an application of the principle that a person should not benefit from his
own wrongdoing (Welwyn Hatfield Borough Council v Secretary of State for
Communities and Local Government [2011] UKSC 15 [2011] 2 AC 304 contains a
recent authoritative exposition of the law). In the present context, the wrongdoing
is twofold. A handler of stolen goods is as much a wrongdoer as the thief (and
being a journalist is not a defence to a charge of handling stolen goods) and, a
person using, or intending to use the goods for a criminal purpose, here to be
involved in the commission etc of acts of terrorism, is equally a wrongdoer for this
purpose.

52.	It is irrelevant in this context whether what Mr Snowden took (to use a neutral
word) was in law property, for that is not determinative of whether he is properly
categorised as a wrongdoer. See Fairs tar Heavy Transport NV v Adkins et al
[2013] EWCA Civ 886 [tab 15] for an illuminating examination of the developing
law of information as property and of the importance of identifying the relevant
issue in the particular case in question.

53.	There is no evidence that the data on the detained material was “acquired for the
purposes of journalism”. The data did not belong to the claimant, as he tacitly
concedes by not asking for its return (paragraph 23 above refers). The claimant is
not a journalist. There is no evidence at all from the claimant in the present
proceedings. The claimant did not when questioned under Schedule 7 say that he
had acquired the data for the purposes of journalism. The reference in paragraph
11 of the claim form grounds [A 15] to “assisting] Mr Greenwald in his
journalistic work” is too insubstantial to bear any weight. And the files were

18

stolen from the first defendant and others. The files therefore cannot have been

held in confidence by the claimant vis-à-vis the first defendant (or vis-à-vis any
other true owner). See the second statement of Mr Robbins. There is no factual
foundation for a finding that the detained material was journalistic material.

54.	The claimant cannot have it both ways. Either he is an innocent courier, in which
case he had not acquired the material for journalistic purposes. Or he was party to
what was ex hypothesi the commission etc of acts of terrorism. The key point
here is that the use of Schedule 7 in the present case was in these circumstances
not for the improper purpose of bypassing the statutory provisions on gaining
access to journalistic material, for it was not the purpose of the defendants to gain
access to journalistic material.

55.	Four, the request of the first defendant, and the decision of the second defendant,
to use Schedule 7 was for a lawful purpose, namely to determine whether the
claimant appeared to be a person falling within s.40(l)(b). Tt was not the purpose
of either defendant to obtain journalistic material.

(iv)	Breach of human rights

56.	The claimant alleges breaches of article 5, 6, 8 and 10 ECHR. The crux of the
claimant’s case is article 10, and it is convenient to take that first. For reasons that
will become apparent, it will then be possible to deal with articles 5, 6 and 8 in
relatively short order.

19

57.	First, some introductory remarks. This is an unorthodox complaint. As previously
mentioned, there is no evidence from the claimant himself. Paragraphs 69-73 of
the claim form grounds [A32-A33] contain generalised statements of complaint.
Paragraph 11 of the claim form grounds [A 15] implicitly concedes that the
claimant is not a journalist. That paragraph asserts that the claimant “regularly
assists Mr [Glen] Greenwald in his journalistic work and was doing so at the time
he was stopped and detained”, Mr Greenwald is not a party to these proceedings.

58.	In respect of article 10 ECHR, there is no factual foundation for a finding that the
claimant intended to use the detained material for publication. There is therefore
no factual foundation for a finding that the defendants interfered with the
claimant’s freedom to impart, or with any third party’s freedom to receive,
information.

59.	Even if, contrary to the first defendant’s case, the defendants did interfere with the
claimant’s or a third party’s freedom of expression, that interference was
prescribed by law (namely by Schedule 7), and was for legitimate aims of the
interests of national security and/or for the prevention of crime and/or for the
protection of the rights of others (namely those who would be endangered by the
disclosure of the data) and/or for preventing the disclosure of information received
in confidence (namely classified documents).

60.	It was also necessary in a democratic society, or in other words a proportionate
measure on the facts of the case. This is for the following reasons.

20

61.	Even if the data was journalistic material, article 10 ECHR does not require as a
rule of law that there must always be judicial scrutiny prior to seizure of the
material. What matters is whether there was an interference with freedom of
expression and, if so, whether it was in accordance with the law, pursued a
legitimate aim and was a proportionate measure in the circumstances. That
requires an investigation of the facts of the particular case, not the application of a
blanket rule of law. This can be seen from an examination of the relevant
Strasbourg case law.

62.	In Nordisk Film v Denmark, application 40485/02 (2005) [tab 8] the European
Court of Human Rights (First Section) dismissed as manifestly ill-founded and
thus inadmissible a complaint by a television company about a judicial order to
disclose unbroadcast documentary film about a paedophile group. The Court
found that the courts had given relevant and sufficient reasons for their decision,
which had been a proportionate one on the facts of the case.

63.	The documentary was filmed covertly, which led the court to say at p.10:

Seen in this light, the applicant company was not ordered to disclose its
journalistic source of information. Rather it was ordered to hand over part of
its own research-material. The Court does not dispute that Article 10 of the
Convention may be applicable in such a situation and that a compulsory hand
over of research material may have a chilling effect on the exercise of
journalistic freedom [citation omitted]. However, this matter can only be
properly addressed in the circumstances of a given case.

On the other hand, the Court is not convinced that the degree of protection
under Article 10 of the Convention to be applied in a situation like the present
one can reach the same level as that afforded to journalists when it comes to
their right to keep their sources confidential, notably because the latter
protection is two-fold, relating not only to the journalist but also and in
particular to the source who volunteers to assist the press in informing the
public about matters of public interest.

21

64.	To pursue the point about the relevance of seeking to identify a journalistic source,
in Telegraaf Media Nederland Landelijke Media BV et al v Netherlands,
application No.39315/06 (2012) 34 BHRC 193 [tab 9] the Court observed at [86]
(emphasis added):

The Court’s understanding of the concept of journalistic “source” is “any
person who provides information to a journalist”; it understands “information
identifying a source” to include, as far as they are likely to lead to the
identification of a source, both “the factual circumstances of acquiring
information from a source by a journalist” and “the unpublished content of the
information provided by a source to a journalist” (see Recommendation
No.R(2000)7 on the right of journalists not to disclose their sources of
information [adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe] (quoted in paragraph 61 above)”.

65.	An analysis of the relevant cases clearly identifies that the Court attaches
importance to the identification of a journalist source, and not simply information
which may be used for the purposes of journalism.

66.	The Telegraaf Media case concerned an article that had been published about the
Netherlands General Intelligence and Security Service, suggesting that highly
classified information had been leaked to criminals. In that case, the journalists
were ordered to surrender the documents pertaining to the activities of the security
services and the journalists were also subject to telephone tapping and
surveillance. In finding that there was a violation of article 10, the Court was of
the opinion that the case was characterised by the targeted surveillance of
journalists in order to determine whence they had obtained the information: [97].
The Court found that the law did not provide safeguards appropriate “to the use of
powers of surveillance against journalists with a view to discovering their
journalistic sources”: [102], The Court similarly found a violation of Article 10 in
respect of the use of an order to surrender documents, stating that the respondent

22

government’s need was not “sufficient to find that it constituted a ‘an overriding
requirement in the public interest’ justifying the disclosure of the applicant’s
journalistic source”.

67.	Goodwin v United Kingdom (1996) 22 EHRR 123 concerned the provision of
information by a source to a journalist relating to financial problems at Tetra Ltd.
The company had been granted an injunction which ordered the disclosure of the
journalist’s notes from a telephone conversation, thereby identifying his source.
The journalist was subsequently fined for contempt of court having failed to
comply with the order. In finding that there had been a breach of article 10, the
Court noted that: “Protection of journalistic sources is one of the basic conditions
for press freedom...Having regard to the importance of the protection of
journalistic sources for press freedom in a democratic society and the potentially
chilling effect an order of source disclosure has on the exercise of that freedom,
such a measure cannot be compatible with article 10 of the Convention unless it is
justified by an overriding requirement in the public interest”: [39]. The Court
found that, in light of an injunction preventing publication of the information
already having been granted, the additional restriction on freedom of expression
which the disclosure order entailed could not be regarded as having been
necessary in a democratic society: [46].

68.	Roemen and Schmit v Luxembourg, application No.51772/99 (2003) [tab 10]
concerned an article that had been published concerning allegations of tax fraud by
a Minister. The underlying documents were said to have been obtained in breach
of professional confidence and the investigating judge issued search warrants

23

relating to the journalist’s home and workplace. The Court was of the opinion that
the searches “were intended to establish the identities of the Registration and
State-Property Department officials who had worked on the file ... to establish the
identity of the person responsible for the breach of confidence, in other words, the
journalist’s source”: [47]. The Court therefore found a breach of article 10,
considering that that the Government had not shown that the balance between the
competing interests “namely the protection of sources on the one hand and the
prevention and punishment of offences on the other, was maintained”: [58],

69. Financial Times Ltd et al v United Kingdom, application No. 821/03 (2009) [tab
11] concerned the leaking of a documents relating to a potential takeover bid to
various news and media organisations. The company concerned, Interbrew,
sought an order requiring the applicants to serve a witness statement setting out
the names and addresses of every person who had provided them with the relevant
documents and, if their identities were not known, the circumstances in which they
received the documents, to the best of their knowledge. In finding that there had
been a breach of article 10, the Court emphasised that a “chilling effect will arise
wherever journalists are seen to assist in the identification of anonymous sources”
and it was sufficient that the information or assistance was required under the
disclosure order for the purpose of identifying ‘X’. The company’s interest in
eliminating the threat of damage through future dissemination of material was not
sufficient to outweigh “the public interest in the protection of journalists’
sources”: [70-71],

24

70.	Weber and Saravia v Germany (2006) 46 EHRR SE5 47 [tab 12] concerned an
amendment to an act known as the “G10 Act” which allowed for the strategic
monitoring of communications. This permitted the collecting of information by
intercepting communications in order to identify and avert serious dangers facing
the Federal Republic of Germany, such as armed attacks on its territory or the
commission of international terrorist attacks and certain other serious offences.
The first applicant was a freelance journalist and the second applicant took
telephone messages for the journalist. The first applicant submitted that the
amended act prejudiced the work of journalists investigating issues targeted by
surveillance measures. She argued that she could no longer guarantee that the
information she received in the course of her journalistic activities remained
confidential. The Court dismissed the application as manifestly ill-founded. The
Court found that the interference was prescribed by law and pursued a legitimate
aim. In consideration of whether such interference was necessary in a democratic
society, the Court noted that surveillance was not aimed at monitoring journalists
and were not directed towards uncovering journalistic sources. The judgement
states:

151.	The Court observes that in the instant case, strategic monitoring was
carried out in order to prevent the offences listed in section 3(1). It was
therefore not aimed at monitoring journalists; generally the authorities would
know only when examining the intercepted telecommunications, if at all, that
a journalist’s conversation had been monitored. Surveillance measures were,
in particular, not directed at uncovering journalistic sources. The interference
with freedom of expression by means of strategic monitoring cannot,
therefore, be characterised as particularly serious.

152.	It is true that the impugned provisions of the amended G 10 Act did not
contain special rules safeguarding the protection of freedom of the press and,
in particular, the non-disclosure of sources, once the authorities had become
aware that they had intercepted a journalist’s conversation. However, the
Court, having regard to its findings under Article 8, observes that the
impugned provisions contained numerous safeguards to keep the interference
with the secrecy of telecommunications - and therefore with the freedom of

25

the press — within the limits of what was necessary to achieve the legitimate
aims pursued. In particular, the safeguards which ensured that data obtained
were used only to prevent certain serious criminal offences must also be
considered adequate and effective for keeping the disclosure of journalistic
sources to an unavoidable minimum, hi these circumstances the Court
concludes that the respondent State adduced relevant and sufficient reasons to
justify interference with freedom of expression as a result of the impugned
provisions by reference to the legitimate interests of national security and the
prevention of crime. Having regard to its margin of appreciation, the
respondent State was entitled to consider these requirements to override the
right to freedom of expression.

71.	The Court has distinguished Weber and Saravia in a number of cases concerning

the identification of journalists’ sources precisely because, as in the instant case,

the intention of the respondent government was not to obtain the identity of the

source. For example, in Telegraaf Media the Court said at [97]:

The present case is characterised precisely by the targeted surveillance of
journalists in order to determine from whence they have obtained their
information. It is therefore not possible to apply the same reasoning as in

Weber and Saravia.

72.	The Strasbourg case law therefore attached particular importance to attempts to
identify a journalist’s source. This concern is not a feature of the present case. It
is public knowledge that Mr Snowden took classified material.

73.	Returning to Nor disk, the Court also took into account the need to protect the

(potential) victims of crime, saying at p. 12:

In that connection, the Court considers that the obligation on Contracting
Parties under Article 1 of the Convention to secure to everyone within their
jurisdiction, the rights and freedoms defined in the Convention, taken in
conjunction with Article 3, requires States to take measures designed to
ensure that individuals within their jurisdiction are not subjected to torture or
inhuman or degrading treatment, including such ill-treatment administered by
private individuals [citation omitted]. These measures should provide
effective protection, in particular, of children and other vulnerable persons and
include reasonable steps to prevent ill-treatment of which the authorities had
or ought to have had knowledge [citation omitted].

26

74.	Nordisk was one of the two cases cited by the Grand Chamber in Sonoma v
Netherlands, application 38224/03 (2010) at its key paragraph [92]. The other
case cited in that paragraph was Wieser and Bicos v Austria (2007) 46 EHRR
1343. Wieser was not a case about journalists or article 10. It was an article 8
“correspondence” case about a search of a lawyer’s office. Wieser does not throw
any light on the present case.

75.	Sanoma was another case concerning a challenge to a court order against a
publisher to deliver up material, here photographs of an illegal car race. The
Grand Chamber found a breach of article 10 because Dutch law did not provide
adequate safeguards: paragraphs 88-100. The key paragraphs of the judgment are
91-92. The claimant seeks to interpret Sanoma as imposing a blanket rule of law
that there must always be a court order (see paragraph 52(7) of the claim form
grounds [A28]) before journalistic material is seized. But the Grand Chamber’s
judgment must be read in the context of the facts of that case. It was about seizure
of material for use as evidence in a criminal investigation. It was not concerned
with terrorism. The magazine was not alleged to be party to the criminal activity
being investigated. The photographers were themselves acting lawfully in taking
the photographs.

76.	On 16 July 2013 the Court (Fourth Section) gave judgment in Nagla v Latvia,
application 73469/10 [tab 13]. The applicant was journalist. She received
information and data from an anonymous source, concerning security flaws in the
database of the Revenue Service. The police obtained a warrant from a prosecutor
to search the applicant’s home, and seized material. The following day, a court

27

retrospectively approved the warrant. The Court’s assessment is at paragraphs 78
ff, though the whole judgment repays reading in full. It would take up too much
space to set out all relevant passages from the judgment here. The Court
considered Nordisk, Telegraaf Media, Goodwin, Financial Times, Roemen,
Sanoma and other cases. The Court concluded, at [91], that on the facts of the
case a retrospective court approval of the warrant was “prescribed by law”.
However, the Court concluded at [ 102] that the reasons given by the Latvian court
were not “relevant and sufficient”. The important point for present purpose is that
it turned on the facts of the particular case. Nagla is inconsistent with the
claimant’s submission that there must always by prior independent scrutiny before
journalistic material is seized.

77.	On the facts of that case, the Court attached importance to, among other things, the
lack of urgency (the application was made almost 3 months after the authorities
learned of the material: [98-100]), and that the applicant was a mere witness
([101]).

78.	Once it is recognized that article 10 ECHR imposes no blanket rule of law
requiring prior judicial approval before seizure of journalistic material, attention
can properly be focussed on the question of proportionality, and on whether
relevant and sufficient reasons have been given for the decision under challenge.
For the avoidance of doubt, the first defendant repeats the submission at paragraph
49 above that there is no evidence in this case that the claimant had, or that the
defendants sought to obtain, journalistic material.

28

79.	Mr Robbins’ second statement explains why Schedule 7 was used in this case. On
the premise that Schedule 7 was used for a proper purpose, then the lack of
feasible alternatives; the urgency; the gravity of what was at stake; the narrow
window of opportunity; the absence of any attempt to identify journalistic sources
or to curb the freedom of the press; constitute relevant and sufficient reasons for
the proportionate action that was taken.

80.	Turning to article 5 ECHR, if as the first defendant submits must be the case, the
court proceeds on the footing that Beghal [tab 7] is correctly decided, then
Schedule 7 is compatible with article 5 ECHR and the claimant was detained in
accordance with a procedure prescribed by law in order to secure the fiilfilment of
an obligation prescribed by law (article 5(1 )(b) ECHR): Beghal paragraph 113.
The live issue here is therefore the proportionality of its use in this case. The
claimant was detained for almost the maximum 9 hours permitted by paragraph
6(4) of Schedule 7.

81.	As stated at paragraph 24 above, the use of Schedule 7 in this case was by the
second, and not by the first, defendant. It was in the circumstances that pertained
legitimate for the police to detain the claimant while attempts were made to
identify the material he was carrying: see Ramsingh v Attorney General of
Trinidad and Tobago [2012] UKPC 16 [tab 16].

82.	As regards article 6 ECHR, the claimant’s complaint is not that he has been
deprived of his property. It is that he has been subject to “coercive questioning”:
paragraph 72(2) of his grounds [A33].

29

83.	The first defendant submits that the claimant’s rights under this article were not
engaged, for the reasons set out at paragraphs 124-133 of the judgment in Beghal
[tab 7]. The submissions made above about Schedule 7 not being in part materia
with Schedule 5 are relevant here too.

84.	As regards article 8 ECHR, in the absence of evidence from the claimant, there is
factual foundation for a finding that the use of Schedule 7 in this case breached the
claimant’s right to respect for his private life or correspondence, even if, which the
first defendant does not concede, it amounted to an interference with that right (as
to which, see paragraphs 28 and 93(i) of Beghal). It should also be noted that, as
mentioned at paragraph 23 above, the claimant implicitly concedes that it is not
his data (and therefore not his “correspondence”) that was held on the detained
property. It may further be noted that in Nagla, the Court did not consider it
necessary to examine the complaint under article 8 ECHR: [103-104].

Relief

85.	Even if, contrary to the first defendant’s submissions, the court were to find that
the use of Schedule 7 in this case was unlawful, the court should nevertheless
refuse the claimant any relief beyond a declaration that the use of Schedule 7 in
this case was unlawful and damages for unlawful detention.

86.	The first defendant resists any giant of relief that would order her to destroy the
data, and copies of it, and to use her best endeavours to recall the data from third
parties to whom it had been passed. This is for two reasons.

30

87.	One, the defendants’ access to and use of the data was and is lawful even if the use
of Schedule 7 in this case was unlawful.

88.	The defendants have statutory and common law duties to protect life, to prevent
crime, to protect national security: see, for example, the Security Service Act
1989; the Intelligence Services Act 1994 and the Regulation of Investigatory
Powers Act 2000. For the purpose of discharging those duties, the defendants
need to be able to act upon information that they acquire, including by decrypting
it. Hence s.l 14 of the Terrorism Act 2000 and s.59 of the Criminal Justice and
Police Act 2001.

89.	Take a hypothetical example. If there was an unlawful Schedule 7 stop in which
was seized a paper containing the code to deactivate a ticking bomb, the
defendants would not only be permitted, they would be duty bound, to act on that
information. So a finding that the use of Schedule 7 is unlawful cannot of itself
require a court to grant the claimant as of right (ex debito justitiae) the relief he
seeks at paragraph 107(2) of his claim form grounds [A45], namely a mandatory
order requiring the defendants “to destroy all data seized from the Claimant
(including all copies of seized data) and to recall any of the Claimant’s data that
has been transferred to third countries”.

90.	On the evidence in the present case, namely the statements of Mr Robbins, the
statement of DSupt Goode, there is a compelling need for the defendants to be
able to continue to access and to make use of the data (including by being able to

31

disclose the data to appropriate third parties, including non-UK third parties,
and/or to seek the assistance of appropriate third parties to access it), to protect
national security and to prevent and to investigate crime. This provides powerful,
the first defendant submits overwhelming, grounds for the court to refuse to grant
any relief that would have the effect of preventing the defendants from making use
of the data, including by granting access to or seeking assistance from third
parties.

91.	The second reason why the first defendant resists any grant of relief that would
order her to destroy the data, and copies of it, and to use her best endeavours to
recall the data from third parties to whom it had been passed is that the evidence
before the court is that the data is not the claimant’s data. It is the first defendant’s
data. It would be worthy of Lewis Carroll if the first defendant were required to
destroy, and to recall from third parties, her own data.

Conclusion

92.	The first defendant submits that the court should dismiss this claim for judicial
review.

93.	If the court were to find that the use of Schedule 7 was unlawful here, the court
should not grant the claimant any relief other than damages for unlawful detention
and a declaration that the use of Schedule 7 in this case was unlawful, and that
declaration should record that the first defendant may continue to use the data for
the purposes permitted by the order made by consent on the application for interim
relief, namely that the defendants shall not copy, disclose, transfer, distribute

32

(whether domestically or to any foreign government or agency) or interfere with
the data held by the claimant and detained pursuant to Schedule 7 save:

(i)	for the purpose of investigating whether the claimant is a person who is
or has been concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation of
acts of terrorism or has committed an offence contrary to ss.58 or 58A
of the Terrorism Act 2000 or the Official Secrets Acts 1911 and 1989;
or

(ii)	for the purpose of protecting national security, including by preventing
or avoiding the endangering of the life of any person or the diminution
of the counter-terrorism capability of Her Majesty’s Government.

STEVEN KOVATS QC
39 Essex Street
JULIAN BLAKE
6 King’s Bench Walk
24 September 2013

33

R

on the application of

DAVID MICHAEL DOS SANTOS MIRANDA

CO/11732/2012

and

(1) SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

(2)	COMMISSIONER OF POLICE FOR THE METROPOLIS

FIRST DEFENDANT’S LIST OF AUTHORITIES

1.	Terrorism Act 2000 ss.l, 40, 53, 58, 58A, 63A, 114, Schedule 7

2.	Counter-terrorism Act 2008 ss. 19-21

3.	Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 ss.8-14, Schedule 1

4.	Immigration Act 1971 s.ll

5.	R (Miranda) v Home Secretary et al [2013] EWPIC 2609 (Admin)

6.	R (CC) v Metropolitan Police Commissioner [2012] 1 WLR 1913

7.	Beghal v DPP [2013] 2573 (Admin)

8.	Nordisk Film v Denmark (2005)

9.	Telegraaf Media Nederland Landelijke Media BV et al v Netherlands, application
No.39315/06 (2012)34BHRC 193

10.	Roemen and Schmit v Luxembourg, application No.51772/99 (2003)

11.	Financial Times Ltd et al v United Kingdom, application No.821/03 (2009)

12.	Weber and Saravia v Germany (2006) 46 EHRR SE5 47

13.	Nagla v Latvia (2013)

14.	R v Javaherifard [2006] IAR 185

15.	Fairstar Heavy Transport NV v Adkins et al [2013] EWCA Civ 886

16.	Ramsingh v Attorney General of Trinidad and Tobago [2012] UKPC 16

34

CO/11732/2013

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT

IN THE MATTER OF A CLAIM FOR
JUDICIAL REVIEW

R

on the application of
DAVID MICHAEL DOS SANTOS
MIRANDA

Claimant

V

(1)	SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE

HOME DEPARTMENT

(2)	COMMISSIONER OF POLICE FOR

THE METROPOLIS

Defendants

FIRST DEFENDANT’S GROUNDS FOR
OPPOSING THE CLAIM

Steven Kovats QC
39 Essex Street
London WC2R 3AT

Treasury Solicitor
1 Kemble Street
London WC2B 4TS

Ref: Z1317427/ZER/B4

35