[editl Business Unit/IPT Head's Responsibility

Each BU/IPT Head is responsible for the legality of his/her team’s activities and must ensure that auditing
takes place to a standard that demonstrates compliance. This responsibility remains with the BU/IPT Head
even if the control and reporting of the audit is delegated. Each BU/IPT audits its own activity. BU/IPT
Heads must:

•	ensure that resources are made available to meet audit requirements

•	confirm that they have seen each audit report and noted the recommendations contained within

•	conduct a light-touch spot-check of audit integrity of the BROAD OAK audit by examining a small
sample of the BROAD OAK records that have been audited to make an objective assessment
whether audit teams have carried out their role in a satisfactory manner

•	provide a short report to OPP-LEG (email will suffice) on the results of the spot-check and on all
plans to implement audit report recommendations, no later than a month after filing each audit
report with OPP-LEG

The spot-check sits alongside existing responsibility to ensure that measures are in place to follow up on
the recommendations in each audit report

[editl What are auditors looking for?

The auditors must make a judgment on whether the information in the following fields demonstrates HRA
compliance. Records must meet the standard required in all fields to pass the audit test:

Some areas have produced local guidance that helps staff to understand how to demonstrate high
standards of HRA compliance. Auditors in these teams should use this guidance to help them to assess
records.

•	Source Reference (BROAD OAK only) - this should provide a clear and traceable reference
indicating where the record-owner got the selector from, and the date of the source. #

o A Telephone Call with a customcr/partncr that has led to the provision of selectors should not
be used a source reference. The telephone call needs to be followed up with a formal record
of the passing of the selector (e.g. An email). This is to ensure a traceable reference to the
origin of the selector. It is up to local areas to decide how best to implement this requirement.

o Any records in the system that pre-date 1 January 2006 may be given a pass if the source
reference is vague or incomplete. Auditors should indicated in the audit report how many
records fall into this category.

o With effect from 20 May 2010, it is mandatory to record a source date as well as a source
reference. Auditors can apply a waiver to any selectors that were targeted before 20 May
2010 that do not have a source date and should indicate in the quarterly audit report how
many records fall into this category; however, auditors should encourage analysts to try to
identify and record an accurate source date.

•	A Telephone Call with a customcr/partncr that has led to the provision of selectors should not be
used a source reference. The telephone call needs to be followed up with a formal record of the
passing of the selector (e.g. an email). This is so that there is a traceable reference to the origin of
the selector. It is up to local areas to decide how best to implement this requirement. •

•	MIRANDA number - this should be relevant to the intelligence requirement and JIC purpose.

o If analysis is being carried out for target development eg targeting selectors linked to a known
target from call records, the MIRANDA number that is relevant to intelligence requirement
should be used, and the targeting period should be limited to 3 months.