o If Sigint Development or even Target Dcvclopmcnt/Discovcry is being conducted in a
broader context the use of a Sigint Development MIRANDA number such as 20135 is
appropriate with, again, the targeting period being limited to 3 months,
o The Open Source MIRANDA number 20142 should only be used by those working in CK.
o There was a change to MIRANDA numbers 01 October 2009 and, from then, there was a
concessionary waiver to treat incorrect old' codes as an amendment required and not an audit
failure; however, this concessionary waiver expired from 01 October 2010. Any incorrect
codes found from now will be treated as a fail.

•	JIC Priority/Purpose - this must be the correct underlying purpose ie NS, EWB or SC; however,
records should not be failed if the priority has changed since the record was first entered, but should
be noted as needing attention and the record should still be amended by the record-owner

•	HRA Justification - this should provide clear explanation of why it is necessary to intrude upon an
individual's privacy by targeting, or running a particular query to examine their communications
(both content and events). The following principles should be applied:

o it should add value to the intelligence requirement and NOT just repeat the intelligence topic
o it should be clear to an uninformed observer why it is necessary and proportionate to intrude
on that particular individual's right to privacy and what the expected intelligence outcome is.
o use of acronyms and codewords is not encouraged as they may be clear to an analyst, but not
necessarily to others. Only the most common abbreivations are acccptabnle; the test is
whether or not the abbreviation would be understood by the Commissioner. Any lists of
acronyms or abbreviations which have been agreed with OPP-LEG in the past as usable are
no longer valid. If explanation of an acronym or codeword may result in the compromise of a
sensitive operation then consult OPP-LEG to discuss a waiver
o TD/SD. CT etc are NOT valid HRA justifications; neither is an operation name without some
further comment to expand on this

•	HRA revalidation - if the targeting of a selector has been renewed beyond the default limit (one
year or three months) or a scheduled content query has been extended, a check that the HRA
justification clearly explains why it is necessary to continue to intrude on an individual's right to
privacy by targeting that selector or running the query.

•	Legal or policy authorisation for target - If this is required (for selectors or queries that relate to
targets in the UK or targets overseas who are sensitive on grounds of location or nationality), the
correct warrant or COPPER reference and a valid expiry date are required. The HRA Review date
must also reflect the expiry date of the warrant or authorisation. Any targeting or content queries
that do not have a valid warrant or STA reference may constitute an offence under Section 1 of
RIPA, a breach of RIPA safeguards or a breach of GCHQ policy. These records must be reported
immediately to OPP-LEG.

OPP-LEG have had questions on Audit requirements in the past and some can be found at FAQ's

[edit] The Report Template

The report should be submitted in a word document using the templates found at the following links.

Please note these links only work using Internet Explorer:

events or udaq audit template

targeting audit template

[edit] Audit Community

Here is a list of the main points of contact for each audit. Please feel free to amend this list as roles