standards. These standards arc designed to meet the legal requirement to demonstrate necessity and
proportionality and to show that GCHQ is acting in accordance with its authorisations and meeting its
human rights obligations. The audit process is designed to achieve this aim.

For full details of the audit requirement please see

Compliance Guide

[editl Audit Timetable

There is currently an audit requirement for a random sample of database records from BROAD OAK
every quarter & HRA EVENTS Service every 6 months at the following intervals; however, this audit
programme is currently under review and this may be subject to change at any time:

JAN	FEB	MAR	APR	MAY	JUN	JUL	AUG	SEP	OCT	NOV	DEC
UDAQ	BROAD  OAK	None	None	BROAD  OAK	EVENTS	UDAQ	BROAD  OAK	None	None	BROAD  OAK	EVENTS

feditl OPP-LEG's Responsibility

OPP-LEG is responsible for overseeing the audit process and for providing guidance on how to complete
an audit. It is OPP-LEG's responsibility to set the objective standards, using metrics, and which measure
HRA compliance. The metrics used arc Red - below 75% being unacceptable non-Compliancc, Amber -
75% to below 94% being fairly Compliant but with room for improvement & Green - 95% and above
being Compliant. It is for this that OPP-LEG provides training and guidance to all staff on the need to
properly justify their work and to demonstrate compliance. OPP-LEG will:

•	provide data samples for the UDAQ and events audits to the chief auditor or LPL at the start of
each audit

•	provide end of year reports to the Deputy Directors for Intelligence Production on the overall
findings of the audits.

•	work with IPTs/BUs, if requested, to help to raise compliance rates and will track key themes that
arc identified in audit reports, and will request changes to systems if necessary.

[editl Analyst's Responsibility

All records of analysts'actions when conducting targeting, tasking, searching and examining intcccpt for
communications content or metadata must demonstrate compliance with HRA. Some areas have produced
local guidance to help staff how to demonstrate high standards of HRA compliance. Please speak to your
Legal and Policy Lead to sec if your area has this guidance and make sure that you are familiar with it as
this is the standard that auditors will use to judge records as part of an audit.

You must ensure that your work:

•	is conducted for one of GCHQ s Sigint purposes: National Security. Economic Well-Being of the
UK or in support of the prevention or detection of Serious Crime

•	supports an intelligence requirement (demonstrated by recording a relevant MIRANDA reference)

•	contains a frec-flow HRA justification stating why you arc intruding an individual's privacy and
what your expected outcome is in conducting this intrusion