DYNAMIC PAGE - HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS

TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) SID Trains for Athens Olympics

USAF

SIGINT Communications
Run Date: 08/15/2003

(U//FOUO) In just over a year the torch will be lit, and thus will kick off the 2004
Summer Olympic Games in Athens, Greece, home to the first Olympic Games.
Although the first race, dive, and somersault are still a year away, the Intelligence
Community is already in full "training mode" for the event. In truth, NSA has been
gearing up for the 2004 Olympics for quite some time, in anticipation of playing a
larger role than ever before at the international games.

(U) Prior Games

(S) The first phase of preparation actually began years ago through the
involvement of NSA with the Olympic Games in other cities. NSA has had an active
role in the Olympics since the 1984 Los Angeles games, and has seen its
involvement increase with the recent games in Atlanta, Sydney, and Salt Lake City.
During the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, the focus was on
counterterrorism, and NSA acted largely in support of the FBI in a fusion cell
known as the Olympics Intelligence Center (OIC). The mission of the OIC was to
fuse foreign intelligence and law enforcement information to provide threat
warning and situation awareness before and during the games. NSA's support to
the 2004 Olympics in Athens will be much more complicated.

(U) The Athens Outlook

(S//SI) Several factors will make the Athens Olympics vastly different, not the least
of which is the fact these Olympics will not be held at a domestic location. Also
different is that the security organization that NSA will support is the EYP, or Greek
National Intelligence Service. NSA will gather information and tip off the EYP of
possible terrorist or criminal actions. Without a doubt, the communication between
NSA and EYP will take some coordination, and for that reason preparations are
already underway.

(S//SI) NSA, and SID in particular, will be sending the largest contingent of
personnel in support of the games in our history. A team of 10 NSA analysts will
arrive in Greece anywhere from 30-45 days before the Olympics and stay until the
flame is extinguished to provide the best support possible to the safety and security
of the games. It is also important to note that preparations are being made for our
in-house support to the games. NSOC again will serve as the single point of contact
for the Olympics for our customers. Work is being done across SID to work with
customers to receive and understand their specific Information Needs. Data
Acquisition, working with SIGINT Development, the Target Offices of Primary
Interest, and the extended SIGINT Enterprise, is preparing a comprehensive
Olympics Collection Strategy. Moreover, SID is partnering with the Foreign Affairs
Directorate to develop a strategy to share threat information with our SIGINT
Partners.