DYNAMIC PAGE - HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS

TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) NSA Team Selected for Olympics Support

FROM: NSA Olympics Support Team
Unknown

Run Date: 12/15/2003

(U//FOUO) The response to the SID vacancy announcement for analytical support
for U.S. Olympics Fusion Center was overwhelming. There were over 300
applicants for the eight available positions and the qualifications of each one of
them was impressive. The selection team wants to thank all those who expressed
an interest in serving at the Olympics Fusion Center next summer. With so many
talented individuals to choose from, it was a Herculean task to review resumes and
make a final selection.

(U//FOUO) The final team members come from varied backgrounds with strong
analytical and reporting skills, TDY or PCS exposure working with other
Intelligence Community and military representatives, and experience in the
counterterrorism production effort. The selectees include:

(S17),

(IA Intern),
(IA Intern),
(IA Intern),
T4SOC),
(S2I),

I), and
(NCEUR).

(S//SI) Preparations and training for the Olympics continue across the extended
NSA enterprise as we bring together U.S. resources and those of our foreign
SIGINT partners. Scenarios are being drafted to support EUCOM and SOCOM
exercises in March, as well as exercises with the SIGINT Seniors nations. These
foreign partners (i.e. Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, the UK and the U.S.) will use the SIGDASYS
communications network to send scripted information to Athens in a
communications exercise during the above exercises. NSA will round out the
exercise phase with another communications exercise utilizing the resources of all
36 foreign partners.

(S) The entire U.S. Intelligence Community (IC) has come together in one team
environment to provide information to both U.S. Government and the Government
of Greece (GOG) customers. The co-location of IC analysts both at the U.S. Embassy
Athens as well as at the Greek National Intelligence Service greatly enhances
information sharing across the IC and provides timely and useful information to the
front end. NSA will continue to be a major contributor to that joint IC effort as we
head for the finish line.