DYNAMIC PAGE - HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS

TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Another Successful Olympics Story

FROM:

Collection Strategies and Requirements Center (S3C)
Run Date: 10/06/2004

(S//SI) Like the athletes themselves, Data Acquisition (DA) expended countless
hours in preparation for the 2004 Athens Olympics. The Collection Strategies and
Requirements Center (CSRC) Olympics Strategists worked with people and
organizations from across the Extended Enterprise to create a SIGINT Campaign
Strategy focusing on support to the Games. Unlike the athletes, when the Olympics
are over, the NSA team is hoping you won't even know they were there. Instead of
Olympic gold, their goal was making sure the Olympics proceeded without terrorist
incident and that the approximately 10,500 athletes from over 200 countries,
millions of fans, and the international press could focus on the sporting events in
the Olympic spirit of peaceful competition.

(S//SI^tarUncn^002^CSRC Strategists,

and HHHIHHHi worked with Customer Relations Division (CRD) and
external customers to document previously unstated Information Needs. Teaming
with SIGDEV and Analysis and Production (A&P) to ensure that an analytic attack
was in place and that targets' social networks were defined, these strategists
examined the evolving communications network being built for the Games,
determined gaps in SIGINT access, and directed fielding of collection and
forwarding systems. And all this was before the torch was lit signifying the Opening
of the Games of the XXVIII Olympiad. In short, the team followed the SID
Operating Principles to systematically analyze what our customers needed and
planned how the SIGINT system would meet those needs.

(S//SI) When the plan went into the implementation phase, the CSRC monitored the
effort. This was simplified through the use of an Info Work Space (IWS) virtual
room dedicated to the Games, which allowed Intelligence Community professionals
from across the Extended Enterprise, including Denver, the National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency's (NGA) 24/7 multi-INT Olympic watch, NSAW, and those
deployed in Athens itself, to coordinate operations smoothly.

(TS//SI) Given the broad scope of the Games, all DA Groups played a part in
improving access, collection, and forwarding of traffic. For example, prior to the
start of the Olympics:

•	Commercial Technologies Group worked with vendors to learn about
communications being installed to support the Olympics;

•	CSRC gathered data from CIA documenting the GSM networks active in
Athens;

•	Special Source Operations improved mid-point cable access to DNI and voice
targets in Greece;

•	SCS Athens fielded additional capabilities to bring traffic back to NSAW;

•	Tailored Access Operations performed CNE operations against Greek
communications providers.