SECRET STRAP1

Intrusion Analysis/JeAC

The IA team conducts all-source analysis both of emerging and current electronic
attack types. It forms part of the Joint Electronic Attack Cell (JeAC). (Other JeAC
elements are EUT, JTRIG and the EA Threat Team). SIGINT targeting by the IA
team falls under EITT oversight (see Seth’s email of 6/12/07). The IA team is
responsible for the management and release of eA signatures.

PoCs:

(Team Leader)

Main Customers: SS, GCHQ, SIS, HMG, 2nd Parties.

Sources: where does the material come from?

•	SIGINT

•	HARUSPEX (though most first-line analysis is done by the Incident Response
Team)

•	MessageLabs data managed via the HARUSPEX network

•	Tasking of CNE

•	Open Source

“Target” location

HARUSPEX sensors monitor attacks against UK systems based on known attack
signatures. These signatures typically reflect attack vectors, infrastructure or entity
identifiers associated with attacks. While the signatures reflect our knowledge of FIS
activities, UK-to-UK traffic may be collected if the attacker is using UK infrastructure.

SIGINT is used to detect attack activity associated with FIS or Foreign Governments.
Selectors include IP addresses, web domains and email addresses. In general these
are not associated with the UK, but where UK infrastructure is involved, appropriate
SIGINT processes are followed.

Report Types: How are results reported?

JeAC reports are issued as standard EPRs via PROSPERO.

Report Distribution Mechanism

PROSPERO

Legal Authorities

Authorisation varies depending on the source of the information:

Any CNE will be authorised under ISA and (where necessary) either with a warrant
issued under s5 or under s7, depending on where the target is located.

Use of the SIGINT system is under the direction of EITT - all normal Ops rules apply
and intercept will have been acquired under Part I of RIPA.

Any HARUSPEX information has been lawfully acquired under the LBPR, as for the
Response Team.

Local Policystatements/documentation

•	signature release policy (X/29373/7008/009/000/0 of 26 June

2007)

1 of 2

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Informatioi^c^OO^nc^may be subject to exemption under
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on mm (non-sec) or email m@gchq

SECTRE STRAP 1

SECRET STRAP 1

email of 6/12/07: “EITT/RCIT is accountable for eA use of the SIGINT
svstem’^^

i'ff/'VlÆ-ÎÎï of EITT is working with OPPLEG on eA-specific authorisations for
CNE (eg. to allow the targeting of UK-based victims).

ls description of the Signature Spreadsheet.

Auditing arrangements

The IA team has a fairly small number of selectors in CORINTH. Team members are
prompted monthly to check the validity of their selectors. Formal audits are
conducted under the auspices of EITT. HRA checking is enforced by the SIGINT
system, in that selectors will age off if not re-validated. Use of SIGINT system for eA
is covered by 2 MIRANDA numbers, corresponding to the separate JIC requirements
for current and emerging electronic threats.

The team maintains a local spreadsheet of about 1500 eA signatures with associated
information on nationality, release, likely false positive rate etc. The Signature
Release Policy mentioned above controls the deployment of these signatures on
HARUSPEX and their release to external agencies.

Number of reporters and their skill levels

There are 6 reporters in the IA team, of whom 2 are trained to Skill level 3 and 2 to
Skill Level 2.

Other available legal/policy training

Operational Legalities Briefing.

Status:

Updated 23/7/08 with input from

2	of 2

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Informatioi^c^OO^nc^may be subject to exemption under
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on mm (non-sec) or email m@gchq

SECTRE STRAP 1