[2014] UKIPTrib 13_77-H

Case Nos: IPT/13/77/H, IPT/13/92/CH,
IPT/13/168-173/H, IPT/13/194/CH,
IPT/13/204/CH

TN THE INVESTIGATORY POWERS TRIBUNAL

P.O. Box 33220
London
SW1H 9ZQ

Date: 05/12/2014

Before :

MR JUSTICE BURTON (PRESIDENT)
MR ROBERT SEABROOK QC
MRS JUSTICE CARR
THE HON CHRISTOPHER GARDNER QC
HIS HONOUR GEOFFREY RIVLIN QC

Between :

Liberty (The National Council of Civil Liberties) First Claimant
- and -

The Government Communications Headquarters & Respondents

Others

-	and -

Privacy International

-	and -

The Secretary of State for the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office & Others

-	and -

American Civil Liberties Union & Others
- and -

Second

Claimant

Respondents

Third

Claimants

The Government Communications Headquarters & Respondents

Others

- and -

Amnesty International Limited

-	and -

The Security Service & Others

-	and -

Bytes For All

-	and -

The Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs & Others

Fourth

Claimant

Respondents

Fifth Claimant
Respondents

Mr Matthew Ryder QC, Dr Eric Metcalfe and Mr Edward Craven (instructed by James
Welch of Liberty ) for the First and Third Claimants and Others
Mr Dan Squires and Mr Ben Jaffey (instructed by Bhatt Murphy Solicitors) for the Second

and Fifth Claimants

Ms Kirsty Brimelow QC and Mr Jude Bunting (instructed by Amnesty International Ltd)

for the Fourth Claimant

Mr James Eadie QC, Mr Ben Hooper and Mr Julian Milford (instructed by the Treasury

Solicitor ) for All Respondents

Mr Martin Chamberlain QC and Mr David Manknell (instructed by the Treasury

Solicitor) as Counsel to the Tribunal

Hearing dates: 14, 15, 16, 17 & 18 July, 31 October and 5 December 2014

Approved Judgment

I	direct that pursuant to CPR PD 39A para 6.1 no official shorthand note shall be taken of this
Judgment and that copies of this version as handed down may be treated as authentic.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

Mr Justice Burton (President) :

1.	This is the judgment of the Tribunal.

2.	The Claimants before the Tribunal are all Non-Governmental Organisations
working in the field of defending human rights at both the national and/or
international levels. Three of them, Privacy International (“Privacy”), Liberty and
Amnesty International Limited (“Amnesty”) are based in the United Kingdom. The
other organisations, which are named in the title to the action but which we do not
need to identify separately in this judgment, are international organisations based in
a variety of countries, including the United States, Canada, Egypt, Pakistan and
Ireland. The case put forward by the various Claimants was shared out amongst the
counsel representing them in order to make the best use of the five days of open
hearing which had been set aside, and four counsel in the end made the various
submissions on their behalf, Mr Matthew Ryder QC, leading counsel for Liberty
and others, Mr Ben Jaffey and Mr Dan Squires on behalf of Privacy and Bytes For
All, the Pakistani organisation, and Ms Kirsty Brimelow QC on behalf of Amnesty,
in each case supported by further junior counsel and solicitors. The Respondents,
variously named as The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
and for the Home Department and various other bodies, have all been represented
by Mr James Eadie QC with Mr Ben Hooper and Mr Julian Milford, instructed by
the Treasury Solicitor.

3.	The Claimants’ complaints allege the unlawfulness pursuant to Article 8 (and
collaterally Article 10) of the European Convention of Human Rights (“the
Convention”) of certain assumed activities of the Security Service (also, and
colloquially, known as MI5), the Secret Intelligence Service (and similarly also
known as MI6) and the Government Communications Headquarters (“GCHQ”),
which we shall collectively describe as the Intelligence Services or Respondents.
All counsel cooperated to slim down what was a substantial set of bundles of papers
and a considerable amount of argument into a five day hearing in which all the
necessary and appropriate points on all sides were fully canvassed. We are grateful
for the persuasiveness and succinctness of counsels’ submissions. We have also
been assisted by the contribution, both in writing and orally, of Counsel to the
Tribunal, Mr Martin Chamberlain QC and Mr David Manknell.

4.	The activities are, as we have put it, assumed for the purpose of the resolution of
agreed issues which we shall explain below, for a number of reasons:

i)	The alleged conduct itself is not admitted by the Respondents. It falls to be
considered as a result of allegations made by Mr Edward Snowden, a former
contractor for the National Security Agency (“NSA”) of the United States, by
whom a very substantial quantity of documentation has been leaked and much
put into the public domain. This has resulted in the Claimants asserting their
belief that investigation of the Respondents would show that the Claimants’
privacy has been unlawfully invaded. Hence the Tribunal’s detailed scrutiny is
at this stage carried out upon the basis of assuming the relevant allegations to
be derived from Mr Snowden’s leaks to be true. The set of assumed facts is
set out below, and the arguments of law have proceeded on the basis of those
assumed facts, which have enabled the main hearing to take place entirely in
public without putting at risk any national security interest. Save for the

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

existence of two programmes in the United States called Prism and Upstream,
which have been publicly admitted in the United States by the NSA, and for
confirmation that GCHQ has obtained information from the United States
Government that the United States Government obtained via Prism, none of
the matters the subject of the assumed facts are admitted by the Respondents
(i.e. they fall within the Neither Confirm Nor Deny (“NCND”) policy to which
we shall refer below), and are only assumed for the purposes of this hearing.
Some further evidence has been put in by both Claimants and Respondents by
way of background, which has not been subject to cross-examination, and
which did not detract from the NCND policy nor the manner in which the
hearing has been conducted.

ii)	As for the Claimants, they have not needed to prove any of the activities,
which are assumed to have occurred, and by virtue of which interference with
their privacy has been assumed. This is consistent with the normal practice of
this Tribunal, which enables claimants to bring claims without having the kind
of arguable case which they would need to pursue a case in the High Court,
and also with the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights
("ECtHR”), which permits and encourages such hypothetical cases on the basis
that if there has been an unlawful interference a claimant may have been a
victim. Thus locus is established so as to permit “general challenges to the
relevant legislative regime” (Kennedy v United Kingdom [2011] 52 EHRR 4
at paragraph 119) by those who are “unable to demonstrate that the impugned
measures had actually been applied to them”” (Weber and Saravia v
Germany [2008] 46 EHRR SE5 at paragraph 78): see also Liberty v United
Kingdom [2009] 48 EHRR 1 at paragraph 57.

5.	The claim before us fell into two parts. The first part was in respect of what has
been called the “Prism issue”, i.e. referring to the NSA programme referred to
above, or the “Intelligence Sharing issue”” because it relates to the supply to the
Respondents by the NSA of information, including information by way of
communications intercepted either via Prism, or possibly via another programme
called the “Upstream programme”. The second part has been described as the
“alleged Tempora interception operation”, although there has been no admission or
explanation as to what this alleged Tempora programme consists of, and the
argument in fact has revolved around the operation by the Respondents of warrants
under s.8(4) of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (“RIPA”) (“s.8(4)
Warrants”). We prefer to use the description “s.8(4) issue” in describing this
question, as the lawfulness or otherwise of what the Respondents have done does
not depend upon the existence or methodology of “Tempora”.

6.	It is important to set these complaints into context. The actions of the Respondents,
which are not suggested to be unlawful save in the respects alleged by reference to
Article 8 of the Convention, to which we refer below, are all taken, or assumed to be
taken, in the interests of national security, and at a time when, according to the most
recent Annual Report to Parliament of the Intelligence and Security Committee of
Parliament (“ISC”), the threat to the United Kingdom from international terrorism is
‘Substantial’, indicating that an attack is a strong possibility; this has been recently
upgraded to ‘Severe’, meaning that an attack is highly likely. The Claimants accept
that Convention jurisprudence recognises the need for states to defend themselves

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

and to introduce measures in support of national security, and that the concept,
familiar within the confines of Article 8, of accessibility and foreseeability, of laws,
rules and arrangements established by democracies in that regard may be
approached differently from those situations where national security is not an issue.
In particular, the Claimants accept that different forms of intelligence gathering do
raise different privacy interests, and the hearing before us has included
consideration of where and how to place and evaluate those before us.

7.	After the five day public hearing, we held a one day closed hearing to consider
certain matters which were, in the considered judgment of the Respondents, too
confidential and sensitive for discussion in open court in the interests of preserving
national security, and in accordance with our jurisdiction to hold such a closed
hearing pursuant to Rule 9 of the Investigatory Powers Tribunal Rules 2000. As
will appear, we considered in particular the arrangements, which Mr Eadie QC
described during the public hearing as “below the waterline", regulating the conduct
and practice of the Intelligence Services, in order to consider (i) their adequacy and

(ii)	whether any of them could and should be publicly disclosed in order to comply
with the requirements of Articles 8 and 10 of the Convention as interpreted by the
ECtHR, to which we will refer further below.

8.	At that hearing, at which the Claimants were not represented, counsel for the
Tribunal played a full part. We heard submissions, both oral and in writing, during
and subsequent to the open hearing as to the role of counsel to the Tribunal and as to
whether a Special Advocate should be appointed to represent the Claimants and be
instructed by them. At our invitation, Counsel to the Tribunal made written
submissions to us, which contained the following passage by way of distinguishing
between the role of Special Advocate and Counsel to the Tribunal:

“15.1 A Special Advocate is appointed (normally, but not
necessarily, pursuant to statute) to represent the interests of a
party at hearings from which that party is excluded. A Special
Advocate is required to be partisan. He or she makes such
submissions (if any) as he considers will advance the interests
of the excluded party. If the Special Advocate reaches the view
that it would not advance the interests of the excluded party to
make submissions at all (as has happened in a few cases), then
the proper course is to decline to make submissions at all, even
though this leaves the tribunal without assistance.

15.2	Counsel to the Tribunal performs a different junction, akin
to that of amicus curiae. His or her function is to assist the
tribunal in whatever way the tribunal directs. Sometimes (eg in
relation to issues on which all parties are represented), the
Tribunal will not specify from what perspective submissions are
to be made. In these circumstances, counsel will make
submissions according to his or her own analysis of the
relevant legal or factual issues, seeking to give particular
emphasis to points not fully developed by the parties. At other
times (in particular where one or more interests are not
represented), the Tribunal may invite its counsel to make
submissions from a particular perspective (normally the

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

perspective of the party or parties whose interests are not
otherwise represented)."

9.	As the Tribunal had had the benefit of very full legal arguments on assumed facts at
the open hearing, we gained a full understanding of the case as fully canvassed
between counsel by reference to more than 140 legal authorities, including a
substantial number of decisions of the ECtHR. We were and remain satisfied that
the Tribunal thus fully appreciated the nature of the Claimants’ case, and in any
event that it could be and was assisted by the full, perceptive and neutral
participation at the closed hearing of counsel to the Tribunal.

10.	In their written submissions Counsel to the Tribunal put forward the following
conclusions for consideration by the Tribunal:

“19.1 The role of counsel to the Tribunal is in principle distinct
from that of Special Advocate. The function of the former is to
assist the Tribunal by performing such junctions as he or she is
directed by the Tribunal to perform. The precise roles played
by counsel to the Tribunal may therefore vary depending on the
circumstances.

19.2	However. in the present circumstances, there is a broad
measure of agreement between the Claimants and the
Respondents that counsel to the Tribunal can best assist the
Tribunal by performing the following roles: (i) identifying
documents, parts of documents or gists that ought properly to
be disclosed;. (ii) making such submissions to the Tribunal in
favour of disclosure as are in the interests of the Claimants and
open justice; and (iii) ensuring that all the relevant arguments
on the facts and the law are put before the Tribunal. In
relation to (iii), the Tribunal will expect its counsel to make
submissions from the perspective of the Claimants’ interests
(since the Respondents will be able to make their own
submissions). If the Tribunal decides to receive closed oral
evidence from one or more of the Respondent’s witnesses, it
may also direct its counsel to cross-examine them. In practice,
the roles performed by counsel to the Tribunal at this stage of
the current proceedings will be similar to those performed by a
Special Advocate in closed material proceedings.

19.3	If, at the closed hearing, the Tribunal concludes that the
closed material relied upon by the Respondents could not be
properly be made open, there will be no needfor any more than
one closed hearing: counsel to the Tribunal will be able to
make submissions on the closed material. If, on the other hand,
it concludes that the closed material relied upon by the
Respondents could be disclosed to the parties. it will invite the
Respondents to consent to such disclosure. If the Respondents
agree, it will afford the parties an opportunity to make open
submissions on the disclosed material. If the Respondents
decline, it will give directions for [a further] open hearing. . . ”

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

The Tribunal considered and conclude that this was the correct analysis and
approach. As will be seen, in the context of a closed hearing there were matters
derived from the evidence in the closed hearing which the Respondents were
prepared to consent to disclose, and there were no matters which the Tribunal
considered should be disclosed which the Respondents declined to disclose.
Written submissions by the parties and a further closed and open hearing then
followed, and some further matters were disclosed voluntarily by the Respondents.
Such open disclosures appear in paragraphs 46 and 47 and 126 below (“the
Disclosures”).

11.	In the judgment which follows, we shall address in full the contentions which were
made by the parties at the open hearings, and reach our conclusions on them. Save
in respect of the Disclosures, it is only in limited respects, as referred to in
paragraphs 54-55 and 138-139 below, that it has been necessary to refer to the
closed hearings for the purposes of this judgment.

12.	Before we set out the agreed factual assumptions or “alleged factual premises'” in
relation to the issues, we should clarify the position in respect of the Convention and
the Agreed Issues listed before us. The questions for us have revolved around
Article 8, which reads, under the Heading “Right to Respect for Private and Family
Life”, as follows:

“1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
life, his home and his correspondence.

2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the
law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
national security, public safety or the economic wellbeing of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the
rights and freedoms of others.”

Liberty, Privacy and Amnesty International also rely upon Article 10 “Freedom of
Expression”, on the basis that, as campaigning organisations, they are also entitled
to the protection of that Article which primarily relates to the freedom of the press.
It is common ground that, subject to one possible exception to which we shall return
later, no different questions fall to be decided by reference to Article 10 than are
raised by Article 8, and we shall therefore leave aside the matter of Article 10,
which underlies Agreed Issues (ii), (iii), (vi) and (vii).

13.	There were also certain of the Agreed Issues (Issue xii), (xiii) and (xiv) which were
described as “Issues of law relating to procedure”, and which, by agreement, have
not fallen for decision at this hearing. They relate in part to the NCND policy, the
importance of which is emphasised by the Respondents in the following paragraphs
of their Open Response:

“5. Secrecy is essential to the necessarily covert work and
operational effectiveness of the Intelligence Services, whose
primary function is to protect national security. See e.g.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

Attorney General v. Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No.2)[1990] 1
AC 109, per Lord Griffiths at 269F.

6.	As a result, the mere fact that the Intelligence Services are
carrying out an investigation or operation in relation to, say, a
terrorist group, or hold information on a suspected terrorist,
will itself be sensitive. If, for example, a hostile individual or
group were to become aware that they were the subject of
interest by the Intelligence Services, they could not only take
steps to thwart any (covert) investigation or operation but also
attempt to discover, and perhaps publicly reveal, the methods
used by the Intelligence Services or the identities of the officers
or agents involved. Conversely, if a hostile individual or group
were to become aware that they were not the subject of
Intelligence Service interest, they would then know that they
could engage or continue to engage in their undesirable
activities with increased vigour and increased confidence that
they will not be detected.

7.	In addition, an appropriate degree of secrecy must be
maintained as regards the intelligence-gathering capabilities
and techniques of the Intelligence Services (and any gaps in or
limits to those capabilities and techniques). If hostile
individuals or groups acquire detailed information on such
matters then they will be able to adapt their conduct to avoid,
or at least minimise, the risk that the Intelligence Services will
be able successfully to deploy those capabilities and techniques
against them.

8.	It has thus been the policy of successive UK Governments to
neither confirm nor deny whether they are monitoring the
activities of a particular group or individual, or hold
information on a particular group or individual, or have had
contact with a particular individual. Similarly, the long-
standing policy of the UK Government is to neither confirm nor
deny the truth of claims about the operational activities of the
Intelligence Services, including their intelligence-gathering
capabilities and techniques.

9.	Further, the “neither confirm nor deny ” principle would be
rendered nugatory, and national security thereby seriously
damaged, if every time that sensitive information were
disclosed without authority (i.e. “leaked”), or it was alleged
that there had been such unauthorised disclosure of such
information, the UK Government were then obliged to confirm
or deny the veracity of the information in question. 10

10.	It has thus been the policy of successive Governments to
adopt a neither confirm nor deny stance in relation to any
information derived from any alleged leak regarding the
activities or operations of the Intelligence Services insofar as

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

that information has not been separately confirmed by an
official statement by the UK Government. That long-standing
policy is applied in this Open Response. ”

Because this hearing has been held on the basis of agreed assumed facts, it has not
been necessary to address this policy or its consequences.

THE PRISM ISSUE

14.	The alleged factual premises agreed for the purposes of the Prism issue (Issue (i))
are as follows:

“1. The US Government’s “Prism” system collects foreign
intelligence information from electronic communication service
providers under US court supervision. The US Government’s
“upstream collection” programme obtains internet
communications under US court supervision as they transit the
internet.

2. The Claimants’ communications and/or communications
data (i) might in principle have been obtained by the US
Government via Prism (and/or, on the Claimants’ case,
pursuant to the “upstream collection” programme) and (ii)
might in principle have thereafter been obtained by the
Intelligence Services from the US Government. Thereafter, the
Claimants’ communications and/or communications data might
in principle have been retained, used or disclosed by the
Intelligence Services (a) pursuant to a specific request from the
intelligence services and/or (b) not pursuant to a specific
request from the intelligence services.”

The issue itself is formulated as follows:

“In the light of factual premises (1) and (2) above, does the
statutory regime as set out in paragraphs 36-76 of the
Respondents’ Open Response to the Claims brought by Liberty
and Privacy satisfy the Art. 8(2) “in accordance with the law ”
requirement?”

15.	The following matters are also in practice agreed between the parties as part of the
agreed assumptions:

i)	The NSA has a lawful basis for targeted interception pursuant to s.702 of the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act 1978 (as amended) (“FISA”), and to
Executive Order 12333, pursuant to which Prism and “Upstream” are lawfully
sanctioned for “the targeting of persons reasonably believed to be located
outside the United States to acquire foreign intelligence information”.
According to the NSA’s ‘Mission Statement’ of 9 August 2013 “the collection
under . . . s.702 is the most significant tool in the NSA collection arsenal for
the detection, identification and disruption of terrorist threats to the U.S. and
round the world": and according to the NSA’s Director of Civil Liberties and

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

Privacy Office Report of April 18, 2014 “NSA is subject to rigorous internal
compliance and external oversight". For the purpose of this hearing the
information assumed to be supplied to the Respondents by the NSA is
assumed to have been lawfully obtained.

ii)	The United States is the principal hub of the world’s telecommunications
system, and a very substantial quantity of the world’s communications pass
through the United States: thus for example an email sent by a sender in the
UK to another email address in the UK may be routed via the United States.

iii)	As set out in paragraph 11 of the Respondents’ open Response:

“11. In order to pursue their statutory objectives, the
Intelligence Services need to share intelligence with foreign
Governments, including the US Government (with which the
Intelligence Services have particularly close ties).

Intelligence that foreign governments share with the
Intelligence Services (on a strictly confidential basis)
represents a significant proportion of the Intelligence
Services’ total store of intelligence on terrorists, organised
criminals and others seeking to harm national security.”

A British-US Communication Intelligence Agreement of 5 March 1946 which
was marked “Top Secret”, and remained so until its transfer to the National
Archive in 2010, governs the arrangements between the British and United
States authorities in relation to the exchange of intelligence information
relating to “foreign” communications, defined by reference to countries other
than the United States, the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth. In his
witness statement Mr Charles Farr, the Director-General of the Office for
Security and Counter Terrorism (“OSCT”) at the Home Office since June
2007, says, after describing the threat from international terrorism, and
quoting from the National Crime Agency’s recent Strategic Assessment, that
“all of the most serious crime threats are transnational”:

“20. . . It is highly unlikely that any government will be able to
obtain all the intelligence it needs through its own activities. It
is therefore vital for the UK Government to be able to obtain
intelligence from foreign governments both to improve its
understanding of the threats that the UK faces, and to gain the
knowledge needed to counter those threats. . . . [He refers to
what is said in paragraph 11 of the open Response quoted
above, and continues]. This store of intelligence forms a
critical resource for the Government in seeking to take
preventative action to counter threats, and save lives."

16.	The relief sought by the Claimants is summarised by Privacy as follows:

“(i) A declaration that the Secretary of State for the Foreign
Office and/or the Secretary of State for the Home Office
have unlawfully failed to ensure that there is in place a
regime which complied with Article 8 and 10 ECHR

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

governing the soliciting, receiving, storing and
transmitting by UK authorities of private communications
of individuals located in the UK which have been
obtained by US authorities.

(ii)	A declaration that the soliciting, receipt, storage and
transmission of such information by the Security Service,
the Secret Intelligence Service and/or GCHQ is unlawful.

(iii)	An order that the Security Service, the Secret Intelligence
Service and/or GCHQ will not solicit, receive, store or
transmit such information unless and until such activities
are governed by a legal regime which satisfies ECHR Art
8 and 10 and will destroy any material unlawfully
obtained."

17.	It is common ground that RIPA is not applicable to a case where there has not been
interception of communications by the Respondents, but receipt of intercepted
communications by the Respondents from the NSA derived from Prism or
Upstream, which might, by dint of the degree of coverage by US interception,
include intercepted product of an email which could have been sent and/or received
in the United Kingdom.

18.	The Respondents rely on the following statutory framework to permit them to
receive and use such information:

i)	S.1 of the Security Service Act 1989 (“SSA”) provides in relevant part:

“(2) The function of [MI5] shall be the protection of national security and,
in particular, its protection against threats from espionage, terrorism and
sabotage, from the activities of agents offoreign powers and from actions
intended to overthrow or undermine parliamentary democracy by political,
industrial or violent means.

(3)	It shall also be the function of [MI5] to safeguard the economic well-
being of the United Kingdom against threats posed by the actions or
intentions of persons outside the British Islands.

(4)	It shall also be the function of [MI5] to act in support of the activities of
police forces, the National Crime Agency and other law enforcement
agencies in the prevention and detection of serious crime."

ii)	The operations of MI5 are under the control of the Director-General, who is
appointed by the Secretary of State (s. 2(1) of SSA). By s. 2(2)(a), it is the
duty of the Director-General to ensure:

“. . . that there are arrangements for securing that no information is
obtained by the Service except so far as necessary for the proper discharge
of its functions or disclosed by it except so far as necessary for that purpose
or for the purpose of the prevention or detection of serious crime or for the
purpose of any criminal proceedings. . .”

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

iii)	Subject to s. 1(2) of the Intelligence Services Act 1994 (“ISA”), the functions
of MI6 are, by s. 1(1):

“(a) to obtain and provide information relating to the actions or intentions
of persons outside the British Islands; and

(b)	to perform other tasks relating to the actions or intentions of such
persons.”

iv)	By s. 1(2) of ISA:

“The functions of [MI6] shall be exercisable only—

(a)	in the interests of national security, with particular reference to the
defence and foreign policies of Her Majesty’s Government in the United
Kingdom; or

(b)	in the interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom; or

(c)	in support of the prevention or detection of serious crime. ”

v)	The operations of MI6 are under the control of the Chief of the Intelligence
Service, who is appointed by the Secretary of State (s. 2(1) of ISA). By s.
2(2)(a), it is the duty of the Chief of the Intelligence Service to ensure:

“. . . that there are arrangements for securing that no information is
obtained by [MI6] except so far as necessary for the proper discharge of its
functions and that no information is disclosed by it except so far as
necessary—

(i)	for that purpose;

(ii)	in the interests of national security;

(iii)	for the purpose of the prevention or detection of serious crime; or

(iv)	for the purpose of any criminal proceedings. . .”

vi)	By s. 3(1)(a) of ISA, the functions of GCHQ include the following:

“. . . to monitor or interfere with electromagnetic, acoustic and other
emissions and any equipment producing such emissions and to obtain and
provide information derivedfrom or related to such emissions or equipment
and from encrypted material. . .”

vii)	By s. 3(2) of ISA, these functions are only exercisable:

“(a) in the interests of national security, with particular reference to the
defence and foreign policies of Her Majesty’s Government in the United
Kingdom; or

(b)	in the interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom in
relation to the actions or intentions of persons outside the British Islands;
or

(c)	in support of the prevention or detection of serious crime.”

viii)	GCHQ’s operations are under the control of a Director, who is appointed by
the Secretary of State (s. 4(1)). By s. 4(2)(a), it is the duty of the Director to
ensure:

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

“. . . that there are arrangements for securing that no information is
obtained by GCHQ except so far as necessary for the proper discharge of
its functions and that no information is disclosed by it except so far as
necessary for that purpose or for the purpose of any criminal proceedings .

ix)	Thus, specific statutory limits are imposed on the information that each of the
Intelligence Services can obtain, and on the information that each can disclose.
Further, these statutory limits do not simply apply to the obtaining of
information from other persons in the United Kingdom or to the disclosing of
information to such persons: they apply equally to obtaining information from
or disclosing information to persons abroad, including foreign intelligence
agencies. In addition, the term “information” is a very broad one, and is
capable of covering e.g. communications and communications data (otherwise
referred to as ‘metadata’ or ‘traffic data’, to which we refer in paragraph 64(i)
below) that a foreign intelligence agency may have obtained and passed to the
Intelligence Services.

x)	By s. 19(2) of the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008 (“CTA”):

“Information obtained by any of the intelligence services in connection with
the exercise of any of its functions may be used by that service in
connection with the exercise of any of its other functions.”

xi)	By s.19(3) and (4) of CTA it is provided that information obtained by,
respectively, MI5 and MI6 for the purposes of any of its functions “may be
disclosed by it - (a) for the purpose of the proper discharge of its functions (b)
in the interests of national security (c) for the purpose of the prevention or
detection of serious crime, or (d) for the purpose of any criminal
proceedings”: and there is a similar provision, but limited to (a) and (d),
relating to GCHQ in s.19(5).

19.	Mr Eadie emphasises that there are thus significant statutory limits imposed on the
information that each of the Intelligence Services can obtain and disclose, which
apply both to obtaining and disclosing information in the United Kingdom and to
obtaining information from or disclosing it to persons abroad, including foreign
intelligence agencies: and he points to the breadth of the definition of the term
“information”, as referred to in paragraph 18(ix) above. Other relevant parts of the
statutory framework upon which Mr Eadie relies are:

i)	The Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). Each of the Intelligence Services is a
“data controller”, and is required by s.4(4) of the DPA to comply with the
data protection principles in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to the DPA, subject to
exemption by ministerial certificate, and are in any event not exempted from
the obligation to comply with the fifth and seventh data protection principles,
which provide:

“(5) Personal data processed for any purpose or purposes
shall not be kept for longer than is necessary for that
purpose or those purposes . . .

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

(7) Appropriate technical and organisational measures shall
be taken against unauthorised or unlawful processing of
personal data and against accidental loss or destruction of,
or damage to, personal data."

ii)	A member of the Intelligence Services commits an offence under s.1(1) of the
Official Secrets Act 1989 (“OSA”) if ‘"without lawful authority he discloses
any information, document or other article relating to security or intelligence
which is, or has been, in his possession by virtue of his position as a member
of any of those services ”. This disclosure can only be made with lawful
authority if it is made in accordance with his official duty by virtue of s.7(1) of
the OSA. Thus, Mr Eadie points out that disclosure of information by a
member of the Intelligence Services in material breach of the relevant
“arrangements” made under s.2(2)(a) of SSA or ISA or s.4(2)(a) of ISA
would be a criminal offence, and there are other criminal obligations in
relation to disclosure under the OSA.

iii)	The Respondents are also bound by their obligations under s.6(1) of the
Human Rights Act 1998, which, in relation to breach of Articles 8 and 10 of
the Convention, is another positive obligation which can be enforced in a
court, or in this case, in this Tribunal.

20.	Thus the Intelligence Services can obtain information (including communications
and communications data) from a foreign intelligence agency falling within their
relevant remit, but by reference to arrangements for securing that the information is
only obtained so far as necessary for one of the specified purposes (as set out in
paragraph 18(ii), (v) and (vii) above), which purposes are identical to those
specified for the obtaining of a warrant under s.8 of RIPA, and insofar as
proportionate for that purpose pursuant to s.6(1) of the HRA.

21.	The Claimants’ response is their complaint that there is on the face of those statutes
(except the DPA) no or no sufficient regulation as to the
receipt/handling/retention/destruction of the information so supplied, such as there
would be in respect of intercepted information obtained pursuant to a warrant under
s.8 of RIPA (whether issued under s.8(1) or s.8(4)), with which we deal below, and
that there is thus interference with the privacy of the correspondents whose
communications are so accessed, without adequate protection under Article 8(2)
(“in accordance with the law""). 22

22.	The Respondents rely upon significant oversight of the Intelligence Services as
protection against arbitrary interference or unlawful use of powers by them. First
there is oversight by the ISC, now regulated under the Justice and Security Act 2013
(“the JSA”). This is a Committee of Members of Parliament, from both Houses and
cross-party, whose Chairman is Sir Malcolm Rifkind QC, a former Foreign
Secretary. The ISC has, and exercises, wide powers, and the Government (including
each of the Intelligence Services) must make available to the ISC information that it
requests in the exercise of its functions, subject to a power of veto under certificate
of the Secretary of State. It has a support staff with the highest level of security
clearance, and must make an annual report to Parliament, and such other reports to
Parliament as it considers appropriate.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

23.	On 17 July 2013 the ISC made a “Statement on GCHQ’s Alleged Interception of
Communications under the US Prism Program”. It had carried out an investigation,
and it reached conclusions which it set out as follows:

“5. Our investigation has included scrutiny of GCHQ ’s access
to the content of communications, the legal framework which
governs that access, and the arrangements GCHQ has with its
overseas counterparts for sharing such information. We have
received substantive reports from GCHQ, including:

•	a list of counter-terrorist operations for which GCHQ was
able to obtain intelligence from the US in any relevant
area;

•	a list of all the individuals who were subject to monitoring
via such arrangements who were either believed to be in the
UK or were identified as UK nationals;

•	a list of every ‘selector’ (such as an email address) for
these individuals on which the intelligence was requested;

•	a list of the warrants and internal authorisations that were
in place for each of these individuals being targeted;

•	a number (as selected by us) of the intelligence reports that
were produced as a result of this activity; and

•	the formal agreements that regulated access to this
material.

We discussed the programme with the NSA and our
Congressional counterparts during our recent visit to the
United States. We have also taken oral evidence from the
Director of GCHQ and questioned him in detail.

•	It has been alleged that GCHQ circumvented UK law by
using the NSA’s PRISM programme to access the content of
private communications. From the evidence we have seen,
we have concluded that this is unfounded.

•	We have reviewed the reports that GCHQ produced on the
basis of intelligence sought from the US, and we are
satisfied that they conformed with GCHQ’s statutory duties.
The legal authority for this is contained in the Intelligence
Services Act 1994.

•	Further, in each case where GCHQ sought information
from the US, a warrant for interception, signed by a
Minister, was already in place, in accordance with the legal

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

safeguards contained in the Regulation of Investigatory
Powers Act 2000.

Next Steps

6.	Although we have concluded that GCHQ has not
circumvented or attempted to circumvent UK law, it is proper
to consider further whether the current statutory framework
governing access to private communications remains adequate.

7.	In some areas the legislation is expressed in general terms
and more detailed policies and procedures have, rightly, been
put in place around this work by GCHQ in order to ensure
compliance with their statutory obligations under the Human
Rights Act 1998. We are therefore examining the complex
interaction between the Intelligence Services Act, the Human
Rights Act and the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act, and
the policies and procedures that underpin them, further. We
note that the Interception of Communications Commissioner is
also considering this issue. ”

24.	Secondly, the Respondents rely upon the important additional oversight afforded by
the Interception of Communications Commissioner (“the Commissioner”), presently
Sir Anthony May, formerly a Lord Justice of Appeal and President of the Queen’s
Bench Division, (although recently temporarily replaced during his indisposition by
his predecessor Sir Paul Kennedy, also a former Lord Justice of Appeal and
President of the Queen’s Bench Division), appointed (for relevant purposes) under
s.57(1) of RIPA, independent from Government and the Intelligence Services. He
too has a staff to assist him with his functions, which include a constant review of
the Intelligence Services, and he is under a duty by s.58(4) to make an annual report
to the Prime Minister regarding the carrying out of his functions, which must be laid
before Parliament. In his latest report (the 2013 Annual Report laid before
Parliament on 8 April 2014), (“the Commissioner’s Report”) he included a section
headed:

“8. Do British intelligence agencies receive from US agencies
intercept material about British citizens which could not
lawfully be acquired by intercept in the UK and vice versa and
thereby circumvent domestic oversight regimes?”

He set out his views (at paragraph 6.8.1-5) by reference to the assumption, which
has also been made for the purposes of the case before us (paragraph 15(i) above)
that the intercept material in question has been lawfully acquired by the United
States Agencies. In the light of his own investigations, as there referred to, he
answered his question in the negative. He concluded as follows:

“6.8.6. . . information lawfully obtained by interception abroad
is not necessarily available by interception to an interception
agency here. In many cases it will not be available. If it is to be

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

25.

26.

lawfully provided from abroad, it is sometimes appropriate for
the interception agencies to apply explicitly by analogy the
RIPA 2000 Part I principles of necessity and proportionality to
its receipt here even though RIPA 2000 Part I does not strictly
apply, because the interception did not take place in the UK by
an UK agency. This is responsibly done in a number of
appropriate circumstances by various of the agencies, and I am
asked to review the consequent arrangements, although this
may not be within my statutory remit. ”

All parties before us accept, and indeed assert, that, by reference to the
jurisprudence of the ECtHR, the interference under Article 8 is not to be judged on
exactly the same basis in relation to the receipt by the Respondents of product
which has already been intercepted by another party as it is when the Respondents
are responsible for such interception. The Claimants submit that the Respondents
fail by reference to any test. The Respondents submit that receipt by them of
information which may (or may not) be derived from intercept simply forms part of
lawful “Intelligence Sharing”, as discussed above, and that sufficient safeguards are
in place.

Mr Farr describes this as follows in his witness statement:

“27. [The descriptions he gives of sharing of intelligence with
foreign states] do not just apply to intelligence obtained
through interception. These paragraphs apply to all forms of
intelligence, including intelligence (i) derived from covert
human intelligence sources (as they would be termed under
RIPA), (ii) derivedfrom or constituting records of audio and/or
visual surveillance and (iii) obtained or derived from covert
property searches.

28.	I am advised that a potential issue in these proceedings is
whether the sharing of intelligence in the form of (or that is
derived from) communications and communications data
between the UK and foreign governments should in some sense
be separately regulated. 29

29.	From the point of view of the privacy interests of those
individuals who are subject to investigative measures, I do not
consider that a workable distinction can be drawn between
such intelligence and the other three forms of intelligence
referred to in paragraph 27 above. In particular, I do not
consider that intelligence in the form of (or that is derived
from) communications and communications data is in some
general sense more personal or private than those other forms
of intelligence. For instance, if an eavesdropping device is
covertly installed in a target’s home it may record
conversations between family members that are more intimate
and personal than those that might be recorded if the target’s
telephone were to be intercepted (and this example becomes
even clearer if, for instance, the telephone in question is only

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

used by the target to contact his criminal associates). To give a
further example, a covert human intelligence source may be
able to provide information about a target as a result of his or
her friendship (or more intimate relationship) with the target
that is more private than information that could be obtained
from, for instance, intercepting the target’s emails.

30.	Nor can some general distinction be drawn between
intelligence from interception and the other forms of covert
intelligence identified in paragraph 27 above in terms of how
likely it is that the individual targets in question will in practice
be able to predict or foresee the possibility of the relevant
investigative measures being taken against them. All forms of
covert intelligence-gathering necessarily seek to benefit from a
lack of awareness on the part of the target in order to maximise
the chance of obtaining valuable intelligence. Interception is,
in this regard, no different from, for instance, covert
surveillance or the use of covert human intelligence sources.”

27.	Mr Eadie submits that it would be inappropriate and unnecessary to differentiate
between the different kinds of information which might be supplied e.g. to foil a
bomb plot in London, and impracticable to try to draw a distinction between
information derived from intercept and not so derived or to seek explanations or
make enquiries from NSA or any other agency as to whether information supplied
did or did not derive from Prism or any other system of interception.

28.	Mr Squires, for Privacy, who carried the burden of the argument on this issue on the
part of all the Claimants, responded by making clear that the Claimants are not
contending that the submissions he is making in this case apply to any information
not obtained by intercept by the NSA. It appeared to us from his submissions that
information from the NSA would fall into three categories:

i)	material which on its face derives from intercept, provided unsolicited;

ii)	communications which the Respondents have requested the NSA to intercept,
or to make available to them as intercept, because they are themselves unable
to do so (‘solicited intercept’);

iii)	all other information or communications obtained from the NSA by way of
shared information, as discussed by Mr Farr.

29.	So far as the first category is concerned, Mr Ryder QC pointed by way of analogy to
s. 15(8) of RIPA, which provides:

“In this section “copy ”, in relation to intercepted material or
related communications data, means any of the following
(whether or not in documentary form) -

(a) any copy, extract or summary of the material or data which
identifies itself as the product of an interception.”

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

The Claimants are not addressing any information which does not ‘identify itself as
the product of an interception’, and he refers to this subsection as indicating that
this is a feasible differentiation, recognised as such (for other purposes) in RIPA.

30.	As for the second category, there was some discussion of the Padfield principle
(Padfield v Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food [1968] AC 997), namely
that a public body is required to exercise its discretionary powers to promote (and
not to circumvent) the policy and objects of the legislation which created those
powers. There was also discussion, emanating from a question from the Tribunal,
of whether there was a role for a concept of ‘agency’. The Respondents plead in
paragraph 58 of their Response as follows:

“In particular, not least given the safeguards and oversight
mechanisms that Parliament saw fit to impose in the case of
interception pursuant to a RIPA interception warrant . . . and
in the light of the well established Padfield principle, it is
accepted that it would as a matter of domestic public law be
unlawful for any of the Intelligence Services to deliberately
circumvent those safeguards and mechanisms (and attempt to
avoid the need to apply for an interception warrant under
RIPA) by asking a foreign intelligence agency to intercept
certain specified communications and disclose them. That is
not to say that there will not be circumstances where there are
legitimate reasons to ask a foreign intelligence agency to
intercept particular communications, for example, where it is
not technically feasible for the Intelligence Services themselves
to undertake the interception in question.”

The Claimants do not suggest that such a request to the NSA for solicited intercept
would fall foul of the Padfield principle, or (in answer to the point raised by the
Tribunal) would render the NSA an agent for the Respondents. However they
submit that, if that occurs, then the Respondents will know that what is subsequently
produced is the product of intercept.

31.	As to these two categories, we summarised Mr Squires’ submissions in the course
of argument as follows (Transcript 3/148):

“ Whether it is solicited, or whether it is not solicited, dealing
with the product of intercept is, at some level or other, an
interference with Article 8 which needs some legal backing,
and there ought to be, at however high a level, a published
procedure in relation to it.” 32

32.	As to the third category, the Claimants make no submissions, but suggest that the
exercise of differentiating out the first two categories should not be difficult, and
certainly does not require making investigation, whether of the NSA or otherwise,
as to whether information supplied by the NSA does result from intercept.
Effectively for the purposes of this hearing the Claimants are accepting that this
third category of information, and the Respondents’ dealings with it, would not need
justification by reference to Article 8.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

33.	The Respondents accept that the obtaining of intercept material within the first two
categories from NSA via Prism triggers an interference with Article 8. However Mr
Eadie’s submission is that there is no authority in Strasbourg to date to suggest or to
support the proposition that the “Weber requirements” would apply to the
obtaining, handling, use, disclosure or destruction of foreign intelligence material of
such kind. This is a reference to the decision of the ECtHR referred to in paragraph
4(ii) above, where the Court, in a case dealing with the recording of
telecommunications in the course of ‘strategic monitoring’ (not greatly different to
interception pursuant to a s.8(4) warrant), summarised the principles underlying
Article 8(2), not for the first time, at paragraph 84, as follows:

“The Court reiterates that the expression “in accordance with
the law ” within the meaning of Article 8(2) requires, firstly,
that the impugned measure should have some basis in domestic
law; it also refers to the quality of the law in question,
requiring that it should be accessible to the person concerned,
who must, moreover be able to foresee its consequences for
him, and compatible with the rule of law.”

The Court then proceeded to set out in relation to an interception case the following
propositions, which have become known as the Weber requirements: we have
numbered these from 1-6 for convenience.

“95. In its case-law on secret measures of surveillance, the
Court has developed the following minimum safeguards that
should be set out in statute law in order to avoid abuses of
power: (1) the nature of the offences which may give rise to an
interception order; (2) a definition of the categories of people
liable to have their telephones tapped; (3) a limit on the
duration of telephone tapping; (4) the procedure to be followed
for examining, using and storing the data obtained; (5) the
precautions to be taken when communicating the data to other
parties; and (6) the circumstances in which recordings may or
must be erased or the tapes destroyed.”

34.	There is no material disagreement between the parties that this is not a Weber case
(as set out in paragraph 25 above), in particular because, in the assumed scenario
under consideration, there is no interception by the Respondents which would, but
for the protection of RIPA (if complied with), be unlawful. Mr Eadie refers to
Uzun v Germany [2011] 53 EHRR 24, which was a case relating to surveillance
using GPS, where the ECtHR expressly said (at para 66) that the Weber
requirements were not applicable because:

“While the Court is not barred from gaining inspiration from
these principles, it finds that these rather strict standards, set
up and applied in the specific context of surveillance of
telecommunications . . . are not applicable as such to cases
such as the present one, concerning surveillance via GPS of
movements in public places, and thus a measure which must be
considered to interfere less with the private life of the person
concerned than the interception of his or her telephone

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

conversations . . . It will therefore apply the more general
principles on adequate protection against arbitrary
interference with Article 8 rights as summarised above."

Mr Eadie submitted (as referred to in paragraph 25 above) that this is simply a
species of intelligence gathering, not to be equated with the position where the UK
itself intercepts. Mr Ryder contended that this ignored the fact that the product of
the intercept would then be stored, used and analysed in the same way as intercepted
material obtained by the Respondent’s themselves - although of course that would
also apply to the information within the Claimants’ third category referred to in
paragraph 28(iii) above.

35.	Both the Respondents and the Claimants accept that Strasbourg jurisprudence places
special emphasis upon interception. Essentially Mr Squires’ submission was that
there are “different levels of “prescribed by law"", and that, as he put it, “we don’t
necessarily say exactly the same [level], but one [has] to have something at least
approaching the “prescribed by law ” standards, set out in Weber etc, when it is
communications intercepted by the US and then accessed here, received here,
analysed here.”

36.	We agree that the Prism Issue engages Article 8 and that even at a ‘lower level’ than
Weber there will need to be a compliance with requirements by the Respondents,
particularly in relation to storage, sharing and retention/destruction. We have set
out the statutory framework which imposes obligations upon the Respondents in
relation to its obtaining information from the NSA, whether derived from intercept
or otherwise, but more is required by the jurisprudence of the ECtHR, albeit at a
‘lesser level’, as the Claimants put it.

37.	The relevant principles appear to us to be that in order for interference with Article
8 to be in accordance with the law:

i)	there must not be an unfettered discretion for executive action. There must be
controls on the arbitrariness of that action.

ii)	the nature of the rules must be clear and the ambit of them must be in the
public domain so far as possible, an “adequate indication"" given (Malone v
UK [1985] 7 EHRR 14 at paragraph 67), so that the existence of interference
with privacy may in general terms be foreseeable.

A clear reiteration of these principles is contained in the judgment of the Court in
Bykov v Russia 4378/02 21 January 2009:

“76. The Court reiterates that the phrase “in accordance with
the law ” not only requires compliance with domestic law but
also relates to the quality of that law, requiring it to be
compatible with the rule of law. In the context of covert
surveillance by public authorities, in this instance the police,
domestic law must provide protection against arbitrary
interference with an individual's right under Article 8.

Moreover, the law must be sufficiently clear in its terms to give
individuals an adequate indication as to the circumstances in

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

which and the conditions on which public authorities are
entitled to resort to such covert measures . . .

78. . . . In particular, in order to comply with the requirement
of the “quality of the law ”, a law which confers discretion must
indicate the scope of that discretion, although the detailed
procedures and conditions to be observed do not necessarily
have to be incorporated in rules of substantive law. The degree
of precision required of the “law” in this connection will
depend upon the particular subject-matter. Since the
implementation in practice of measures of secret surveillance
of communications is not open to scrutiny by the individuals
concerned or the public at large, it would be contrary to the
rule of law for the legal discretion granted to the executive - or
to a judge - to be expressed in terms of an unfettered power.

Consequently, the law must indicate the scope of any such
discretion conferred on the competent authorities and the
manner of its exercise with sufficient clarity to give the
individual adequate protection against arbitrary interference. ”

38.	It is quite plain, as we have said at paragraph 6 above, that in the field of national
security much less is required to be put in the public domain, and the degree of
foreseeability must be reduced, because otherwise the whole purpose of the steps
taken to protect national security would be at risk. The views of the Court to that
effect in paragraphs 67 and 68 of Malone are encapsulated by the Court in Leander
v Sweden [1987] 9 EHRR 433 at paragraph 51:

“However, the requirement of foreseeability in the special
context of secret controls of staff in sectors affecting national
security cannot be the same as in many other fields. Thus, it
cannot mean that an individual should be enabled to foresee
precisely what checks will be made in his regard by the
Swedish special police service in its efforts to protect national
security. Nevertheless, in a system applicable to citizens
generally, as under the Personnel Control Ordinance, the law
has to be sufficiently clear in its terms to give them an adequate
indication as to the circumstances in which and the conditions
on which the public authorities are empowered to resort to this
kind of secret and potentially dangerous interference with
private life.

In assessing whether the criterion of foreseeability is satisfied,
account may be taken also of instructions or administrative
practices which do not have the status of substantive law, in so
far as those concerned are made sufficiently aware of their
contents.

In addition, where the implementation of the law consists of
secret measures, not open to scrutiny by the individuals
concerned or by the public at large, the law itself, as opposed
to the accompanying administrative practice, must indicate the

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

39.

40.

41.

scope of any discretion conferred on the competent authority
with sufficient clarity, having regard to the legitimate aim of
the measure in question, to give the individual adequate
protection against arbitrary interference. ”

We consequently bear carefully in mind the requirement to give adequate protection
against arbitrary interference on the one hand, but on the other hand that
foreseeability does not require all the rules which govern or exclude that
arbitrariness to be disclosed, particularly in the field of national security. We thus
approach this Prism Issue, in which it is, as we have set out, largely common ground
that the Weber requirements do not need to be enforced in all their rigour, in
relation to a case where the interception has already been carried out by others.

In Esbester v UK [1994] 18 EHRR CD 72, the Commission, after reference to the
passages in Malone and Leander set out or referred to above, addressed the
complaints that guidelines governing supervision of the use of information obtained
by the Security Services were unpublished. It continued (at CD 74):

“The Commission notes that the exercise of the Security
Service’s functions [is] subject to express limitations and to the
supervision of a tribunal and commissioner appointed pursuant
to the 1989 Act. The guidelines referred to in section 2(3) of
the Act relate only to the administrative implementation of
preceding provisions, which expressly limit the use of
information by the Service to that necessary to fulfil its
functions.

In light of the above, the Commission considers that in the
present case the law is formulated with sufficient precision to
enable the applicant to anticipate the application of vetting
procedures and to the likely nature of the involvement of the
Security Service and police Special Branches with regard to the
collection, recording and release of information relating to
himself..”

We consider that what is required is a sufficient signposting of the rules or
arrangements insofar as they are not disclosed. We find the Claimants’ asserted
distinction between the first and second categories and the third category referred to
in paragraph 28 above a very difficult one, certainly in terms of the asserted
contrasting consequences. We do not find that Weber - or ‘nearly-Weber’ -
should apply to two of the categories, though not applying to the third. We are
satisfied that in the field of intelligence sharing it is not to be expected that rules
need to be contained in statute (Weber) or even in a code (as was required by virtue
of the Court’s conclusion in Liberty v UK. It is in our judgment sufficient that:

i)	Appropriate rules or arrangements exist and are publicly known and
confirmed to exist, with their content sufficiently signposted, such as to give
an adequate indication of it (as per Malone: see paragraph 37(ii) above).

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

ii)	They are subject to proper oversight.

42.	As to their existence, arrangements are provided for in the statutory framework to
which we have referred in paragraph 18 (ii), (v) and (viii) above. Mr Farr in his
witness statement explains as follows:

“51. The Intelligence Services take their legal duties under the
regime very seriously. The statutory framework is underpinned
by detailed internal guidance (including the “arrangements" to
which reference is made in section 2 of the Security Service Act
1989 and sections 2 and 4 of the Intelligence Services Act
1994), and by a culture of compliance.

52. This culture of compliance is reinforced by the provision of
mandatory training to staff within the Intelligence Services
regarding the legal and policy framework within which they
operate. The training includes clear instructions on the need
for strict adherence to the law and to internal guidance.

55. The full details of the arrangements between the
Intelligence Services and the UK's foreign intelligence partners
for the sharing of intelligence, and the internal guidance of the
Intelligence Services for the handling and use of intelligence
obtained as a result, are (and have always been) kept
confidential. I am satisfied that they cannot safely be published
without undermining the interests of national security and the
prevention and detection of serious crime. There are four main
reasons for this."

Mr Eadie on instructions stated in open hearing that such arrangements also
included provision for destruction. Mr Farr also referred in paragraph 74 of his
witness statement to what the ISC had said in paragraph 7 of its Statement, set out in
paragraph 23 above, as to GCHQ having put in place policies and procedures to
underpin the statutory provisions.

43.	In paragraphs 56 to 61 of his witness statement Mr Farr explained why in his belief
“the full details of the arrangement between the Intelligence Services and the UK’s
Foreign Intelligence Partners for the sharing of intelligence, and the internal
guidance of the Intelligence Services for the handling and use of intelligence
obtained as a result are (and have always been) kept confidential . . . and cannot
safely be published without undermining the interest of national security and the
prevention and detection of serious crime". He gives four detailed reasons, to
which we refer. 44

44.	These rules or arrangements (in respect of any or all of the Claimants’ three
‘categories’) were thus not made known in their detail to the public, and to that
extent are not accessible, and, unlike the Code published under RIPA, to which we
shall turn, not even a summary of what they contain was disclosed. However the

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

significant fact is that they are subject to oversight and investigation, namely by the
ISC and the Commissioner, as appears in paragraphs 23 and 24 above.

45.	They are now in the process of challenge before this Tribunal. As accepted in
Kennedy at paragraph 167, and as pointed out in Telegraaf Media Nederland v
the Netherlands [2012] 34 BHRC 193 at paragraph 98, this Tribunal, albeit that it
has a different role from the Commissioner, who has power to make roving
inspections, has a distinct role to play in oversight by way of investigating
complaints made to it, and has its own rules to facilitate that investigation. These are
founded upon the obligation of the Respondents to provide all relevant material to
the Tribunal pursuant to s.68(6) of RIPA. The Tribunal has the power to operate its
own procedures pursuant to the Rules (the Investigatory Powers Tribunal Rules
2000) which have been made under s.69(6) of RIPA, which have regard, in
particular, to:

“(a) the need to secure that matters which are the subject of
proceedings, complaints or references brought before or made
to the Tribunal are properly heard and considered; and

(b) the need to secure that information is not disclosed to an
extent, or in a manner, that is contrary to the public interest or
prejudicial to national security, the prevention or detection of
serious crime, the economic well-being of the United Kingdom
or the continued discharge of the functions of any of the
intelligence services.”

Rules 6 and 9 permitted and facilitated the following of the procedure set out in
paragraph 10 above (particularly as set out in paragraph 19.3 there cited).

46.	The Tribunal has in our judgment very distinct advantages over both the
Commissioner and the ISC, some of which are set out in paragraphs 70 to 76 of the
Respondents’ Response. In particular:

i)	It can hold this hearing and have the benefit of inter partes argument at which
forceful legal submissions can be made on behalf of Claimants who seek to
criticise the system. This is and was not available to the ISC or to the
Commissioner. Ms Brimelow for Amnesty highlighted a number of matters
which she submits were either missed or not dealt with by the ISC: all of
those matters have now been addressed before us in depth.

ii)	It can hold a public hearing on assumed facts, as it has done in this case, i.e.
facts which are asserted by the Claimants, and would otherwise be the subject
of NCND, without the Claimants needing to present an arguable case that they
are the subject of interference (see paragraph 4(ii) above).

iii)	It has access to all secret information, and can adjourn into closed hearing in
order to assess whether the arrangements (a) do indeed exist as asserted by Mr
Farr, (b) are adequate to do the job of giving the individual “adequate
protection against arbitrary interference".

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

47.

iv)	It has, and takes, the opportunity, with the benefit of full argument, to probe
fully whether matters disclosed to it in closed hearing, pursuant to the
Respondents’ obligation to do so pursuant to s.68(6) of RIPA, can and should
be disclosed in open and thereby publicised.

We have been greatly assisted by the substantial submissions in the open hearing,
and in the closed hearings by sight of and understanding what Mr Eadie called the
“arrangements below the waterline" and their explanation, and submissions by the
Respondents and by Counsel to the Tribunal. As a result of the process described in
paragraph 10 above, the following Disclosure was made by the Respondents
relevant to the Prism Issue. It was made by reference to the evidence given in the
closed hearing which they were prepared to disclose, subject to the express caveat
that references to “the Intelligence Services” in the Disclosure were references to
whichever of the Intelligence Services carried out the relevant activities described in
it, in the context of the factual premises set out in paragraph 14 above:

“1. A request may only be made by the Intelligence Services
to the government of a country or territory outside the
United Kingdom for unanalysed intercepted
communications (and associated communications data),
otherwise than in accordance with an international
mutual legal assistance agreement, if either:

a.	a relevant interception warrant under the Regulation
of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (“RIPA”) has
already been issued by the Secretary of State, the
assistance of the foreign government is necessary to
obtain the communications at issue because they
cannot be obtained under the relevant RIPA
interception warrant and it is necessary and
proportionate for the Intelligence Services to obtain
those communications; or

b.	making the request for the communications at issue in
the absence of a relevant RIPA interception warrant
does not amount to a deliberate circumvention of RIPA
or otherwise contravene the principle established in
Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food [1968] AC 997 (for example, because it is not
technically feasible to obtain the communications via
RIPA interception), and it is necessary and
proportionate for the Intelligence Services to obtain
those communications. In these circumstances, the
question whether the request should be made would be
considered and decided upon by the Secretary of State
personally.

For these purposes a “relevant RIPA interception
warrant” means either (i) a s8(1) warrant in relation to
the target at issue; (ii) a s8(4) warrant and an
accompanying certificate which includes one or more

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

“descriptions of intercepted material” (within the
meaning of s8(4)(b) of RIPA) covering the target’s
communications, together with an appropriate s16(3)
modification (for individuals known to be within the
British Islands); or (iii) a s8(4) warrant and
accompanying certificate which includes one or more
“descriptions of intercepted material” covering the
target’s communications (for other individuals). The
reference to a “warrant for interception, signed by a
Minister” being “already in place” in the ISC’s
Statement of 17 July 2013 should be understood in these
terms. (Given sub-paragraph (b), and as previously
submitted in open, a RIPA interception warrant is not as
a matter of law required in all cases in which unanalysed
intercepted communications might be sought from a
foreign government.)

2. Where the Intelligence Services receive intercepted
communications content or communications data from the
government of a country or territory outside the United
Kingdom, irrespective whether it is / they are solicited or
unsolicited, whether the content is analysed or
unanalysed, or whether or not the communications data
are associated with the content of communications, the
communications content and data are, pursuant to
internal “arrangements”, subject to the same internal
rules and safeguards as the same categories of content or
data, when they are obtained directly by the Intelligence
Services as a result of interception under RIPA."

We considered that this Disclosure could be made open, and it was so made with the
consent of the Respondents.

48.	In addition, after the further open hearing, the Respondents made the following
further Disclosure of evidence given in the closed hearings: 1

(1)	“The US Government has publicly acknowledged that the

Prism system and Upstream programme, undertaken in
accordance with Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act, permit the acquisition of communications
to, from, or about specific tasked selectors associated with
non-US persons who are reasonably believed to be located
outside the United States in order to acquire foreign
intelligence information. To the extent that the Intelligence
Services are permitted by the US Government to make
requests for material obtained under the Prism system
(and/or on the Claimants' case, pursuant to the Upstream
programme), those requests may only be made for
unanalysed intercepted communications (and associated
communications data) acquired in this way."

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

(2)	As to the request referred to in paragraph 1(b) of the Disclosure above (a
“1(b) Request”),

“Any such request would only be made in exceptional
circumstances, and has not occurred as at the date of this
statement.”

49.	As described in paragraph 10 above, the Claimants made submissions as to the
Disclosure, both in writing and at the further open hearing, which, insofar as
relevant to this Prism Issue, are as follows:

(i)	They relied upon and repeated their arguments that the Tribunal is not
entitled to look below the waterline to examine the arrangements and
safeguards, even if the Tribunal is satisfied that there is adequate indication
of them above the waterline and even for the purpose of assessing their
adequacy.

(ii)	They submitted that the Disclosure which was produced after the first
closed hearing and then amended in the light of the Claimants’ written
submissions and the further closed and open hearings, was unsatisfactory in
that it did not disclose its sources nor of what it was a gist or summary.

(iii)	The description of circumstances in which such a request could be made
where a s.8(4) warrant was in existence was unclear.

(iv)	They complain of the limitation of the Disclosure by reference to paragraph
48(1) to Prism and Upstream, but it is plain that this case, and this Issue, only
relate to Prism and Upstream.

50.	They also made understandable complaint about the limitation of paragraph 1 of the
Disclosure to unanalysed intercept and associated communications data. This is
now clarified and met by the further Disclosure of evidence given in closed set out
in paragraph 48 above. As for the balance of the Claimants’ submissions:

(i)	We shall return further to this later in the judgment, but we conclude that
the Tribunal is entitled to look below the waterline in order to be satisfied

(a)	that there are adequate safeguards (b) that what is described above the
waterline is accurate and gives a sufficiently clear signpost to what is below
the waterline without disclosing detail of it.

(ii)	We do not accept that the holding of a closed hearing, as we have carried it
out, is unfair. It accords with the statutory procedure, and facilitates the
process referred to in paragraphs 45 and 46 above. This enables a
combination of open and closed hearings which both gives the fullest and
most transparent opportunity for hearing full arguments inter partes on
hypothetical or actual facts, with as much as possible heard in public, and
preserves the public interest and national security.

(iii)	The Disclosure has been a running document, being amended by additions or
clarifications on 2 occasions (ignoring one which was necessitated by an
unfortunate typographical error which was entirely the fault of the Tribunal

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

Secretariat) and again as set out in paragraph 47 above, taking account of the
submissions and criticisms of the Claimants and the observations of the
Tribunal in closed hearing. We are satisfied that the Disclosures cast a clear
and accurate summary or résumé of that part of the evidence given in the
closed hearing which ought to be disclosed: and that the balance of the
evidence and submissions given in closed hearing was too sensitive for
disclosure without risk to national security or to the NCND principle.

(iv)	We are satisfied that the description of the circumstances in which, when a
request is made, there is an existing warrant is clear. Although the reader of
this judgment will be enabled to understand the position better when, in
relation to the s.8(4) issue, fuller exposition is given below, it is clear that the
preconditions are either the existence of a s.8(1) warrant or the existence of a
s.8(4) warrant within whose ambit the proposed target’s communications fall,
together, if the individual is known to be within the British Islands, with a
s.16(3) modification.

51.	In relation to paragraph 1 of the Disclosure, this subjects any requests pursuant to
Prism and/or Upstream in respect of intercept or communications data to the RIPA
regime, save only for the wholly exceptional scenario referred to as a 1(b) request.
A 1(b) request has in fact never occurred, as the ISC has recognised as set out at
paragraph 5 of its Statement, (cited in paragraph 23 above), and as now confirmed
by the Respondents, as set out in paragraph 48(2) above.

52.	In relation to paragraph 2 of the Disclosure, by which the same obligations and
safeguards are applied to the receipt of any intercept or communications data
pursuant to Prism and/or Upstream as apply when they are obtained directly by the
Intelligence Services as a result of interception under RIPA:

(i)	We must address below, with regard to the s.8(4) Issue, the nature and
adequacy of those obligations and safeguards resulting from and relating to
interception under RIPA, and, subject to (ii) below, the same considerations
will apply.

(ii)	As Mr Squires accepted, the clarification given within paragraph 1 of the
Disclosure, that there will only be a request under Prism and/or Upstream,
by reference to the existence of a s.8(4) warrant, which relates to an
individual known to be within the British Islands, if a s.16(3) modification
is in place, means that the RIPA safeguards under ss.15 and 16 (dealt with
in detail below) in fact apply: except as he pointed out, in respect of a 1(b)
Request so far as s.16 safeguards are concerned. 53

53.	The one matter of concern is this. Although it is the case that any request for, or
receipt of, intercept or communications data pursuant to Prism and/or Upstream is
ordinarily subject to the same safeguards as in a case where intercept or
communication data are obtained directly by the Respondents, if there were a 1(b)
request, albeit that such request must go to the Secretary of State, and that any
material so obtained must be dealt with pursuant to RIPA, there is the possibility
that the s.16 protection might not apply. As already indicated, no 1(b) request has
in fact ever occurred, and there has thus been no problem hitherto. We are however
satisfied that there ought to be introduced a procedure whereby any such request, if

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

it be made, when referred to the Secretary of State, must address the issue of
s.16(3).

54.	Subject to this, and to the caveat in paragraph 52(i) above, we are satisfied that the
concerns as to the categories in paragraphs 28(i) and (ii) above, as to which we were
addressed, are resolved. Nothing that we saw or heard in the closed hearings cast
any doubt upon what is stated by the ISC, as set out in paragraph 23 above. As for
paragraph 6.8.6 of the Commissioner’s Report (set out in paragraph 24 above), this
is now corroborated by what has been disclosed, in circumstances to which we shall
refer in paragraph 130 below, in a document disclosed by the Respondents in other
proceedings before this Tribunal (Belhadj IPT/13/132-9H), relied upon by the
Claimants in these proceedings, at paragraph 4: “GCHQ treats all operational data
as if it were obtained under RIPA”. There are rules and procedures, the nature and
effect of which have been sufficiently disclosed, which result in the same
requirements being applied to both those two categories, and indeed to all intercept,
solicited or unsolicited, obtained pursuant to Prism and/or Upstream, as apply to
intercept obtained under RIPA by the Intelligence Services themselves.

55.	After careful consideration, the Tribunal reaches the following conclusions:

(i)	Having considered the arrangements below the waterline, as described in this
judgment, we are satisfied that there are adequate arrangements in place for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the statutory framework and with Articles 8
and 10 of the Convention, so far as the receipt of intercept from Prism and/or
Upstream is concerned.

(ii)	This is of course of itself not sufficient, because the arrangements must be
sufficiently accessible to the public. We are satisfied that they are sufficiently
signposted by virtue of the statutory framework to which we have referred and
the Statements of the ISC and the Commissioner quoted above, and as now, after
the two closed hearings that we have held, publicly disclosed by the Respondents
and recorded in this judgment.

(iii)	These arrangements are subject to oversight.

(iv)	The scope of the discretion conferred on the Respondents to receive and
handle intercepted material and communications data and (subject to the s.8(4)
issues referred to below) the manner of its exercise, are accordingly (and
consistent with Bykov - see paragraph 37 above) accessible with sufficient
clarity to give the individual adequate protection against arbitrary
interference.

We refer in paragraphs 153-155 below to the consequences of these conclusions.

56.	We should deal with a submission by Ms Brimelow for Amnesty International,
although not made or adopted by the other Claimants, made by reference to Article
8, and to Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
which provides that:

“No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful
interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence.”

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

and that

“Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against
such interference.”

57.	Amnesty’s case is that the United Kingdom thereby owes a positive obligation to
prevent or forestall the United States from intercepting such communications; this
would extend to not acquiescing in such course by receiving the product. There are
numerous difficulties about such an argument. The first is that such alleged positive
duty would need to be enforceable against the U.K. by this Claimant (Amnesty
International). Then it would seem very unlikely that such a contention would fall
within the ambit of the issue being decided at this hearing, as set out in paragraph 14
above.

58.	As the Respondents point out, Amnesty does not explain how the United Kingdom
could prevent the United States from obtaining (lawfully on the assumptions made
for the purposes of this hearing) communications, from United States
communication providers under s.702 of FISA, to protect its own national security,
nor why the Respondents should be expected, if such is alleged, to undermine the
attempts of the United States to protect its own national security, by informing the
subjects of US surveillance that their personal data had been obtained, stored or
searched by US Officials. The authorities referred to by Ms Brimelow all involve a
state’s connivance in the acts of third parties such as to engage its own
responsibility under the Convention, such as connivance in acts performed by
foreign officials on its own territory (El-Masri v Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia [2013] 57 EHRR 25). There is no authority which imposes any
obligation on the part of contracting states to secure that non-contracting states,
acting within their own jurisdiction, respect the rights and freedoms guaranteed by
the Convention, even if the failure of such non-contracting states to do so may have
adverse effects on persons within the jurisdiction of contracting states; nor to pursue
a complaint by one of its citizens of breach of his or her rights by another state
within the jurisdiction of that state (Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation v United
Kingdom [1978] 14 DR 117 and the other Commission cases recited with
agreement in (R)Al-Rawi v Foreign Secretary [2008] QB 289 at paragraphs 96 to
99). The Respondents also refer to M v Italy [2013] 57 EHRR 29 at paragraph 127,
where the ECtHR said that:

“127 . . . the Convention organs have repeatedly stated that the
Convention does not contain a right which requires a High
Contracting Party to exercise diplomatic protection, or espouse
an applicant’s complaints under international law, or
otherwise to intervene with the authorities of another state on
his or her behalf. ” 59

59.	Ms Brimelow drew our attention to the Report dated 30 June 2014 of the Office of
the United Nations High Commission of Human Rights, in which the UN
Commissioner referred to the failure by states to take effective measures to protect
individuals within their jurisdiction against illegal surveillance practices by other
states, in breach of their own human rights obligations. However, not only does the
UN Commissioner not identify what those human rights obligations are, but in this

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

case there is no suggestion other than that the surveillance practices assumed to
have taken place under s.702 of FISA and Executive Order 12333 were not illegal.

60.	We did not call upon the Respondents to respond to this additional submission, and
we do not accept it, for the reasons we have set out above.

THE S.8(4) ISSUE

61.	We must begin by setting out a little of the statutory structure contained in RIPA.
By s.1(1), interception of any communication in the course of its transmission by
means of a public telecommunication system is unlawful unless, relevantly to this
case, it takes place as provided for by s.1(5)(b) of the Act in accordance with a
warrant under s.5 (“an interception warrant”). By s.2(2) a person intercepts a
communication in the course of its transmission by means of a telecommunication
system if (materially) he so modifies or interferes with the system or its operation,
or so monitors transmissions made by means of the system as to make “some or all
of the contents of the communication available, while being transmitted, to a person
other than the sender or intended recipient of the communication’”. By s.2(7) the
times while a communication is being transmitted by means of a telecommunication
system “shall be taken to include any time when the system by means of which the
communication is being, or has been, transmitted is used for storing it in a manner
that enables the intended recipient to collect it or otherwise to have access to it’.

62.	It is common ground that interception can simply comprise the obtaining and
recording of a communication (as it is being transmitted), so as to make it available
subsequently to be read, looked at or listened to by a person: no one in fact needs
actually to have read, looked at or listened to the communication for interception to
occur.

63.	S.5 of the Act provides in material part as follows:

“5 Interception with a warrant.

(1) Subject to the following provisions of this Chapter, the
Secretary of State may issue a warrant authorising or requiring
the person to whom it is addressed, by any such conduct as may
be described in the warrant, to secure any one or more of the
following—

(a)	the interception in the course of their transmission by
means of a postal service or telecommunication system of the
communications described in the warrant;

(d)	the disclosure, in such manner as may be so described, of
intercepted material obtained by any interception authorised
or required by the warrant, and of related communications
data.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

(2)	The Secretary of State shall not issue an interception
warrant unless he believes—

(a)	that the warrant is necessary on grounds falling within
subsection (3); and

(b)	that the conduct authorised by the warrant is
proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by that
conduct.

(3)	Subject to the following provisions of this section, a warrant
is necessary on grounds falling within this subsection if it is
necessary—

(a)	in the interests of national security;

(b)	for the purpose of preventing or detecting serious crime;
[or]

(c)	for the purpose of safeguarding the economic well-being
of the United Kingdom;

(4)	The matters to be taken into account in considering
whether the requirements of subsection (2) are satisfied in the
case of any warrant shall include whether the information
which it is thought necessary to obtain under the warrant could
reasonably be obtained by other means.

(5)	A warrant shall not be considered necessary on the ground
falling within subsection (3)(c) unless the information which it
is thought necessary to obtain is information relating to the
acts or intentions of persons outside the British Islands.

(6)	The conduct authorised by an interception warrant shall be
taken to include—

(a)	all such conduct (including the interception of
communications not identified by the warrant) as it is
necessary to undertake in order to do what is expressly
authorised or required by the warrant;

(b)	conduct for obtaining related communications data; and

(c)	conduct by any person which is conduct in pursuance of
a requirement imposed by or on behalf of the person to
whom the warrant is addressed to be provided with
assistance with giving effect to the warrant.” 64

64.	There are limited persons who can apply for an interception warrant, as specified in
s.6, who include (materially for our purpose), the Director General of MI5, the

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

Chief of MI6 and the Director of GCHQ. Save in exceptional circumstances, an
interception warrant cannot be issued except under the hand of the Secretary of
State, who will be the Home Secretary for the purposes of MI5, and the Foreign
Secretary for the purposes of MI6 and GCHQ.

65.	There are two kinds of interception warrants, a s.8(1) warrant, which can be
described as a ‘targeted warrant’, with which these complaints and this judgment do
not deal, and a s.8(4) warrant, which can be described as an ‘untargeted’ warrant or
‘strategic’ warrant (by reference to the similar monitoring considered in Weber) or,
because of the provision in sub-section 8(4)(b) below, a ‘certificated’ warrant. S.8
reads as follows:

“8 Contents of warrants.

(1)	An interception warrant must name or describe either—

(a)	one person as the interception subject; or

(b)	a single set of premises as the premises in relation to
which the interception to which the warrant relates is to take
place.

(2)	The provisions of an interception warrant describing
communications the interception of which is authorised or
required by the warrant must comprise one or more schedules
setting out the addresses, numbers, apparatus or other factors,
or combination of factors, that are to be usedfor identifying the
communications that may be or are to be intercepted.

(3)	Any factor or combination of factors set out in accordance
with subsection (2) must be one that identifies communications
which are likely to be or to include—

(a)	communications from, or intended for, the person named
or described in the warrant in accordance with subsection
(1); or

(b)	communications originating on, or intended for
transmission to, the premises so named or described.

(4)	Subsections (1) and (2) shall not apply to an interception
warrant if—

(a)	the description of communications to which the warrant
relates confines the conduct authorised or required by the
warrant to conduct falling within subsection (5); and

(b)	at the time of the issue of the warrant, a certificate
applicable to the warrant has been issued by the Secretary of
State certifying—

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

(i)	the descriptions of intercepted material the
examination of which he considers necessary; and

(ii)	that he considers the examination of material of
those descriptions necessary as mentioned in section
5(3)(a), (b) or (c).

(5)	Conduct falls within this subsection if it consists in—

(a)	the interception of external communications in the course
of their transmission by means of a telecommunication
system; and

(b)	any conduct authorised in relation to any such
interception by section 5(6).

(6)	A certificate for the purposes of subsection (4) shall not be
issued except under the hand of the Secretary of State."

66.	S.8(5) is of some significance in this hearing. As provided in s.8(5)(a), the
interception of ‘external’ communications, to which we will return, is expressly
authorised; but by virtue of s.8(5)(b) so also is conduct falling within s.5(6) (set out
in paragraph 63 above). Thus, apart from the express reference in s.5(6)(b) to
“obtaining related communications data"", there is also in s.5(6)(a) clear
authorisation to intercept communications “not identified by the warrant", i.e.
communications other than external communications, thus including internal
communications, where it is necessary to do so “in order to do what is expressly
authorised or required by the warrant".

67.	S.20 is the interpretation section for the purposes of Chapter 1 of RIPA, which is the
relevant Chapter:

i)	For the meaning of communications data cross-reference is made to s.21(4),
which gives the following definition:

“(a) any traffic data comprised in or attached to a
communication (whether by the sender or otherwise) for the
purposes of any postal service or telecommunication system
by means of which it is being or may be transmitted;

(b) any information which includes none of the contents of a
communication (apart from any information falling within
paragraph (a)) and is about the use made by any person—

(i)	of any postal service or telecommunications
service; or (ii)

(ii)	in connection with the provision to or use by any
person of any telecommunications service, of any part
of a telecommunication system."

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

As set out in Paragraph 18(ix) above, such communications data are
colloquially called ‘metadata’.

ii)	It is related communications data if it:

“a) is obtained by, or in connection with, the interception; and

(b) relates to the communication or to the sender or recipient,
or intended recipient, of the communication;”

iii)	“Intercepted material”, “in relation to an interception warrant means the
contents of any communications intercepted by an interception to which the
warrant relates””. It is common ground that this definition does not include
“related communications data””, separately defined as set out above.

iv)	“External communication”” means a communication sent or received outside
the British Islands.

68.	All parties refer to a passage in Hansard, when RIPA was debated in Parliament.
Lord Bassam of Brighton, the relevant Minister, in a speech which led to the
withdrawal of a proposed amendment, which had been proposed because Lord
Phillips of Sudbury had contended that “it will be extraordinarily difficult, if not
impossible, to capture simply external communications””, said as follows:

“It is just not possible to ensure that only external
communications are intercepted. That is because modern
communications are often routed in ways that are not all
intuitively obvious. Noble Lords who have contributed to the
debate understand that. An internal communication say, a
message from London to Birmingham—may be handled on
its journey by Internet service providers in, perhaps, two
different countries outside the United Kingdom. We
understand that. The communication might therefore be
found on a link between those two foreign countries. Such a
link should clearly be treated as external, yet it would
contain at least this one internal communication. There is no
way of filtering that out without intercepting the whole link,
including the internal communication.

Even after interception, it may not be practicably possible to
guarantee to filter out all internal messages. Messages may
well be split into separate parts which are sent by different
routes. Only some of these will contain the originator and
the intended final recipient. Without this information it will
not be possible to distinguish internal messages from
external. In some cases it may not be possible even if this
information is available. For example, a message between
two foreign registered mobile phones, if both happened to be
roaming in the UK, would be an internal communication, but
there would be nothing in the message to indicate that.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

69.

70.

71.

72.

It is still the intention that Clause 8(4) warrants should be
aimed at external communications. Clause 8(5) limits such a
warrant to authorising the interception of external
communications together with whatever other conduct is
necessary to achieve that external interception. Whenever
such a warrant is signed, the Secretary of State must be
convinced that the conduct it will authorise as a whole is
proportionate—my favourite word—to the objects to be
achieved. His decision to sign will be overseen by the
Interception of Communications Commissioner.”

In the Interception of Communications Code of Practice (“the Code”) issued
pursuant to s.71 of RIPA, to which we will return, the definition of External
Communications was encapsulated in paragraph 5.1, under “Chapter 5; Interception
Warrants (s.8(4))”, as follows:

“5.1 This section applies to the interception of external
communications by means of a warrant complying with
section 8(4) of the Act. External communications are defined
by the Act to be those which are sent or received outside the
British Islands. They include those which are both sent and
received outside the British Islands, whether or not they pass
through the British Islands in course of their transit. They do
not include communications both sent and received in the
British Islands, even if they pass outside the British Islands
en route. Responsibility for the issuing of such interception
warrants rests with the Secretary of State.”

S.8(4) is of course central to the issues in this part of the case. The Respondents
describe the s.8(4) regime in paragraph 66 of their skeleton as one which in
principle “permits a substantial volume of communications to be intercepted, and
then requires the application of a selection process to identify a smaller volume of
intercepted material that can actually be examined by persons, with a prohibition
on the remainder being so examined . . . To this extent, it differs from the regime
that applies under s. 8(1) of RIPA, under which interception warrants target a
specified person or single set ofpremises.”

The Tribunal agrees with the statement of the Commissioner in paragraph 6.5.38 of
his Report that:

“The section 8(4) structure does not permit random trawling
of communications. This would be unlawful. It only permits a
search for communications referable to individuals the
examination of whose communications are certified as
necessary for a statutory purpose. ”

Although Amnesty in its skeleton argument hyperbolically describes the
Respondents’ purpose as “to obtain data wholesale from every living human being
with a working internet connection”, that is not the case as put orally by the
Claimants, and we are entirely clear that the Respondents are not seeking, nor
asserting that the system entitles them to seek, to carry out what has been described

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

as “mass” or “bulk" surveillance. Mr Ryder made clear that he is not alleging
indiscriminate trawling, but rather “discriminate (in the sense that it is within very
broad selectors) but vast". The Respondents describe their case in paragraphs 70 to
71 of their skeleton, that the only way to intercept external communications being
sent to, for example, an individual in Syria whose address they do not have is to:

“70 . . . intercept a substantially greater volume of
communications (including, potentially, a volume of internal
communications), and then apply a selection stage to identify
the communications in question. In other words, it is common
ground that the only practical way to find and reconstruct most
external communication “needles ” is to look through the
communications “haystack”.

71. . . Unless the Claimants wish to submit that the Intelligence
Services should not be able to obtain the external
communications that are needed for the purposes of national
security, etc., they must accept some form of interception
regime that permits substantially more communications to be
intercepted (including, potentially, internal communications)
than are actually being sought.”

73.	Mr Ryder in his closing submissions made it absolutely clear that the Claimants did
not intend in any way to limit, hinder or obstruct the important work that the
Intelligence Services do. Their submissions, he made clear, were guided at putting
what the Services do within a framework and asking the Tribunal to do no more
than what Parliament wanted the Tribunal to do, namely to indicate to Government
when something is not in accordance with the law, in order to ensure that
Government action was done in the most effective way and in accordance with
proper legal principle.

74.	Under the heading “Restrictions on use of Intercepted Material etc"" there are the
following two sections of RIPA, which in material part are as follows:

“15 (1) Subject to subsection (6), it shall be the duty of the
Secretary of State to ensure, in relation to all interception
warrants, that such arrangements are in force as he considers
necessary for securing—

(a)	that the requirements of subsections (2) and (3) are
satisfied in relation to the intercepted material and any
related communications data; and

(b)	in the case of warrants in relation to which there are
section 8(4) certificates, that the requirements of section 16
are also satisfied. 2

(2)	The requirements of this subsection are satisfied in relation
to the intercepted material and any related communications
data if each of the following—

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

(a)	the number of persons to whom any of the material or
data is disclosed or otherwise made available,

(b)	the extent to which any of the material or data is
disclosed or otherwise made available,

(c)	the extent to which any of the material or data is copied,
and

(d)	the number of copies that are made,

is limited to the minimum that is necessary for the authorised
purposes.

(3)	The requirements of this subsection are satisfied in relation
to the intercepted material and any related communications
data if each copy made of any of the material or data (if not
destroyed earlier) is destroyed as soon as there are no longer
any grounds for retaining it as necessary for any of the
authorised purposes.

(4)	For the purposes of this section something is necessary for
the authorised purposes if, and only if—

(a)	it continues to be, or is likely to become, necessary as
mentioned in section 5(3);

(5)	The arrangements for the time being in force under this
section for securing that the requirements of subsection (2) are
satisfied in relation to the intercepted material or any related
communications data must include such arrangements as the
Secretary of State considers necessary for securing that every
copy of the material or data that is made is stored, for so long
as it is retained, in a secure manner.

(6)	Arrangements in relation to interception warrants which
are made for the purposes of subsection (1)—

(a)	shall not be required to secure that the requirements of
subsections (2) and (3) are satisfied in so far as they relate
to any of the intercepted material or related communications
data, or any copy of any such material or data, possession of
which has been surrendered to any authorities of a country
or territory outside the United Kingdom; but

(b)	shall be required to secure, in the case of every such
warrant, that possession of the intercepted material and data
and of copies of the material or data is surrendered to
authorities of a country or territory outside the United

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

Kingdom only if the requirements of subsection (7) are
satisfied.

(7)	The requirements of this subsection are satisfied in the case
of a warrant if it appears to the Secretary of State—

(a)	that requirements corresponding to those of subsections
(2) and (3) will apply, to such extent (if any) as the Secretary
of State thinks fit, in relation to any of the intercepted
material or related communications data possession of
which, or of any copy of which, is surrendered to the
authorities in question; and

(b)	that restrictions are in force which would prevent, to
such extent (if any) as the Secretary of State thinks fit, the
doing of anything in, for the purposes of or in connection
with any proceedings outside the United Kingdom which
would result in such a disclosure as, by virtue of section 17,
could not be made in the United Kingdom.”

We have already referred to s. 15(8) in paragraph 29 above.

“16. (1) For the purposes of section 15 the requirements of this
section, in the case of a warrant in relation to which there is a
section 8(4) certificate, are that the intercepted material is
read, looked at or listened to by the persons to whom it
becomes available by virtue of the warrant to the extent only
that it—

(a)	has been certified as material the examination of which
is necessary as mentioned in section 5(3)(a), (b) or (c); and

(b)	falls within subsection (2).

(2)	Subject to subsections (3) and (4), intercepted material falls
within this subsection so far only as it is selected to be read,
looked at or listened to otherwise than according to a factor
which—

(a)	is referable to an individual who is known to be for the
time being in the British Islands; and

(b)	has as its purpose, or one of its purposes, the
identification of material contained in communications sent
by him, or intended for him. 3

(3)	Intercepted material falls within subsection (2),
notwithstanding that it is selected by reference to any such
factor as is mentioned in paragraph (a) and (b) of that
subsection, if—

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

75.

(a)	it is certified by the Secretary of State for the purposes of
section 8(4) that the examination of material selected
according to factors referable to the individual in question is
necessary as mentioned in subsection 5(3)(a), (b) or (c); and

(b)	the material relates only to communications sent during
a period specified in the certificate that is no longer than the
permitted maximum .

The Code, to which we referred in paragraph 69 above, is the subject of affirmative
resolution of both Houses of Parliament. It contains a number of important
provisions, of which we have already set out paragraph 5.1 in that paragraph. In
Chapter 2, “General rules on interception with a warrant" there is specific guidance
under paragraphs 2.4 and 2.5 with regard to necessity and proportionality in relation
to the issue of warrants, and there are provisions in paragraphs 2.11 to 2.13 in
relation to the duration of the interception warrants. Chapter 3 provides for
safeguards against collateral intrusion and in respect of information which is
confidential, is subject to legal privilege or involves confidential journalistic
material. Chapter 4 relates to s.8(1) warrants, while Chapter 5 deals with s.8(4)
warrants. Apart from paragraph 5.1, there is an important provision relating to an
application for such a warrant, which contains the following:

“5.2 An application for a warrant is made to the Secretary of
State. Interception warrants, when issued, are addressed to the
person who submitted the application. This person may then
serve a copy upon any person who may be able to provide
assistance in giving effect to that warrant. Each application, a
copy of which must be retained by the applicant, should contain
the following information:

•	Background to the operation in question.

•	Description of the communications to be intercepted,
details of the communications service provider(s) and
an assessment of the feasibility of the operation where
this is relevant.

•	Description of the conduct to be authorised, which must
be restricted to the interception of external
communications, or to conduct necessary in order to
intercept those external communications, where
appropriate.

•	The certificate that will regulate examination of
intercepted material.

•	An explanation of why the interception is considered to
be necessary for one or more of the section 5(3)
purposes.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

•	A consideration of why the conduct to be authorised by
the warrant is proportionate to what is sought to be
achieved by that conduct.

•	A consideration of any unusual degree of collateral
intrusion, and why that intrusion is justified in the
circumstances. In particular, where the communications
in question might affect religious, medical or
journalistic confidentiality or legal privilege, this must
be specified in the application.

•	Where an application is urgent, supporting justification
should be provided.

•	An assurance that intercepted material will be read,
looked at or listened to only so far as it is certified, and
it meets the conditions of sections 16(2)-16(6) of the
Act.

•	An assurance that all material intercepted will be
handled in accordance with the safeguards required by
sections 15 and 16 of the Act."

There are then provisions placing obligations on the Secretary of State in relation to
the authorisation of such a warrant, and giving further guidance as to its necessity
and proportionality (paragraphs 5.3 to 5.6). Paragraph 5.12 provides, in respect of
renewal of such a warrant, that:

“The Secretary of State may renew a warrant at any point
before its expiry date. Applications for renewals are made to
the Secretary of State and contain an update of the matters
outlined in paragraph 5.2 above. In particular, the applicant
must give an assessment of the value of interception to the
operation to date and explain why he considers that
interception continues to be necessary for one or more of the
purposes in section 5(3)."

Detailed records are required to be kept by paragraph 5.17.

76. Chapter 6 of the Code is headed “Safeguards"". There is detailed reference to ss.15
and 16, to dissemination of intercepted material, to copying, storage and, in
paragraph 6.8, destruction:

“6.8 Intercepted material, and all copies, extracts and
summaries which can be identified as the product of an
interception, must be securely destroyed as soon as it is no
longer needed for any of the authorised purposes. If such
material is retained, it should be reviewed at appropriate
intervals to confirm that the justification for its retention is still
valid under section 15(3) of the Act."

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

77.

78.

Paragraph 6.9 deals with personnel security.

As appears from what we have set out above, there are numerous references to the
duty of the Secretary of State to ensure that arrangements are in force in relation to
dealings with the intercepted material and any related communications data: viz
sub-sections 15(1), (5), (6): and there are some similar references in the Code (e.g.
paragraph 5.17). Mr Farr, in his witness statement, similarly to his evidence with
regard to the Prism Issue, says as follows as to these arrangements:

“100. Section 15 of RIPA imposes a duty on the Secretary of
State to ensure, in relation to section 8(4) warrants, that such
arrangements are in force as he considers necessary for
securing that the requirements of sections 15(2)-(3) and 16 are
satisfied. Chapter 6 of the current Code expands on the nature
of the required safeguards, as does the revised draft Code to
which I refer in paragraph 161 below (which was published for
consultation and remains in the public domain). Beyond these
public statements, the full details of the sections 15 and 16
arrangements are (and have always been) kept confidential. I
have reviewed the safeguards that have been put in place for
the purposes of sections 15 and 16 and I am satisfied that they
cannot safely be put into the public domain without
undermining the effectiveness of interception methods. This
would be contrary to the interests of national security and
prejudicial to the prevention and detection of serious crime.

Interception techniques form a critical resource for the
Government in countering terrorism and serious crime. To
maintain the effectiveness of the techniques of interception that
are adopted, the Government must take steps to ensure
appropriate levels of secrecy not only as regards the fact of
interception but also as regards the detailed manner in which it
is performed. This applies to what I am able to say about the
nature of the s. 8(4) regime and the safeguards that attach to it.

101. Although the full details of the sections 15 and 16
arrangements cannot be made public, they are not simply an
internal Government matter. Rather, they are made available
to the Commissioner (see paragraph 6.1 of the Code) who is
required (by section 57(2)(d)(i) of RIPA) to keep them under
review. Further, to facilitate oversight by the Commissioner (i)
each intercepting agency is required to keep a record of the
arrangements in question (see paragraph 5.17 of the Code) and
(ii) any breach of the arrangements must be reported to the
Commissioner (paragraph 6.1 of the Code)."

The alleged factual premises agreed for the purposes of the s.8(4) Issue at this
hearing are as follows:

“3. The Claimants’ communications might in principle have
been intercepted in the United Kingdom under the s. 8(4)
regime (as defined in the Original Open Response) and at least

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

some of those intercepted communications might in principle
have been “read, looked at or listened to” by a person or
persons under that regime.

4. The Claimants allege:

(a)	the Intelligence Services operate a programme,
described as Tempora, under which fibre optic cables
are intercepted. This involves making available the
contents of all the communications and communications
data being transmitted through the fibre optic cables;

(b)	the intercepted communications and communications
data may be retained for an indefinite period and
automatically searched through the use of a large
number of search terms, including search terms
supplied by the United States National Security Agency.

(c)	The intercepted communications and communications
data may then be further retained, analysed and shared
with other public authorities.”

79.	Leaving aside the questions relating to Article 10, as discussed in paragraph 12
above, the Agreed Issues themselves are formulated as follows:.

“Issue (iv)

In light of the factual premises at paragraphs (3) and (4)
above, does the statutory regime as set out in paragraphs 102-
178 of the Respondents’ Open Response to the Claims brought
by Liberty and Privacy satisfy the Art. 8(2) “in accordance
with the law” requirement?

Issue (v)

Given the Claimants’ allegations at factual premise (4), is the
definition of “external communications” within s.20 Regulation
of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 sufficiently precise to be “in
accordance with the law” for the purposes ofArt.8(2)?

Issue (ix)

Does the absence of a requirement that any s. 8(4) warrants
issued in respect of the alleged Tempora programme target
specific individuals or premises give rise to a breach of the
“necessity” and “in accordance with the law” requirements in
Art. 8(2) and/or (if the answer to Issue (vi) is “yes”) Art.

10(2)?

Issue (x)

Are the “necessity” and “in accordance with the law”
requirements in Art. 8(2) . . . breached because interception

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

under the s. 8(4) regime issued in respect of the alleged
Tempora programme may in principle involve (i) the
interception (and subsequent recording) of communications
and communications data without there being any reason to
suspect that the communications of the individuals in question
are relevant to national security, serious crime and/or the
economic well-being of the United Kingdom, and (ii) the
intercepted communications and communications data so
obtained being processed to determine whether (pursuant to s.

16 and the certificate in question) it may be read, looked at or
listened to by one or more persons?

Issue (xi)

Does the alleged Tempora programme and/or the s. 8(4)
regime give rise to unlawful discrimination contrary to (i) Art.

14	of the ECHR (as read with Art. 8 and/or Art. 10), . . .”

We have foreshortened the wording of this Issue, because it became common
ground that there was only need to consider the Convention in this regard.

80.	Although these issues were agreed as forming the basis for the hearing, it was
inevitable that some of them should elide and overlap, and it seems to us that the
following Four Questions encapsulate the arguments:

(1)	Is the difficulty of determining the difference between external and internal
communications, whether as a theoretical or practical matter, such as to cause the
s.8(4) regime not to be in accordance with law contrary to Article 8(2)?

(2)	Insofar as s.16 of RIPA is required as a safeguard in order to render the
interference with Article 8 in accordance with law, is it a sufficient one?

(3)	Is the regime, whether with or without s.16, sufficiently compliant with the
Weber requirements, insofar as such is necessary in order to be in accordance
with law ?

(4)	Is s.16(2) indirectly discriminatory contrary to Article 14 of the Convention, and,
if so, can it be justified? It should be explained that, led by Mr Jaffey, the
Claimants developed this more limited argument in the course of the hearing,
effectively not pursuing the original pleaded claim by all Claimants that s.8(4) and

(5)	were so discriminatory.

The relief sought is effectively for a declaration that the Respondents acted
unlawfully in violation of the Claimants’ rights under Articles 8 and 14 ECtHR.

81.	Before we turn to consider these questions, it is important to set out four matters of
juristic background.

82.	By a judgment of 9 December 2004 this Tribunal, Mummery LJ President, Burton J
(then Vice-President), made a ruling in relation to the s.8(4) regime in a case which
has been called the British Irish Rights Watch case, in which the complainants

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

were represented by Liberty. This Tribunal concluded that the s.8(4) regime was in
accordance with law. It is immediately necessary to say that of the Four Questions,
set out above, now before this Tribunal, the first, second and fourth questions were
not addressed, because they were not raised, and the third question was not
addressed in terms of Weber, which had not yet reached the ECtHR.

83.	Nevertheless, it is important to refer to the Tribunal’s conclusions, and we quote
certain passages from the judgment:

“9. The s8(4) warrant is accordingly also described as a
“certificated warrant ”. It can and may result, provided that
the requirements of s8(4) and (5) are satisfied, in the
interception of all communications between the United
Kingdom and an identified city or country.

11.	It is apparent that the interference with the privacy of
communications is likely to be greater by virtue of a s8(4)
warrant than as a result of what Counsel called a “targeted”
s8(1) warrant; although there may still be a mass of material
obtained pursuant to a s8(1) warrant, dependent upon the
activities of the individual, or at the premises, the subject of the
warrant, and the number of calls made. In relation to both
regimes, there are restrictions upon the use of intercepted
material. S15 in particular applies to both a s8(1) and a s8(4)
warrant. By s15(1) the Secretary of State must ensure in
relation to all interception warrants that such arrangements
are in force as he considers necessary for securing, by
reference to s15(2), that there is the minimum necessary
disclosure and copying of such material, and by reference to
s15(3) the soonest possible destruction. No challenge is any
longer made by the Complainants to the processes relating to
disclosure retention or destruction of material obtained under a
s8(1) or a s8(4) warrant. There are extra safeguards provided
by s16 of RIPA in the case of s.8(4), or certificated, warrants.

14.	As to the safeguards in ss15 and 16 of RIPA, in his witness
statement served on behalf of the Respondents, the Director
General of the Organised Crime, Drugs and International
Group of the Home Office explains as follows:

'26. The internal agency manuals that set out the section 15
and section 16 safeguards, contain comprehensive
instructions and refer in detail to specific techniques and
processes. This level of detail is required precisely in order
to ensure that the section 15 and section 16 safeguards, and
the section 8(4) requirements, are properly understood by
staff and are fully effective in practice. For the reasons

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

given in the above paragraph [his description of the growing
threat of terrorism, and the use by terrorist groups of
modern technology, requiring to be countered by
interception techniques and appropriate levels of secrecy to
protect those techniques] the Government is unable to
disclose the full detail of the arrangements for s8(4)
warrants that are in place under sections 15 and 16 of
[RIPA]. Disclosure of the specific arrangements, the
Government assesses, and I believe, would be contrary to the
interests of national security. In particular, it would enable
individuals to adapt their conduct so as to undermine the
operational effectiveness of any interception efforts which it
might be thought necessary to apply to them. It is axiomatic
that such instructions would be a very great utility to, for
instance, members of the intelligence agencies of countries
that are hostile to British interests.

27. In the light of the above, what I set out in this statement is
the fullest account of the safeguards and operating
procedures that the Government is able to provide without
undermining national security. The Government has
experience of the loss of intelligence available to it and the
loss of effectiveness of its intelligence gathering machinery,
consequent upon revealing details of the methodologies
available to it’”

84.	In paragraph 15 of the judgment it was recited that two complaints, which have been
repeated before us, though not in any way in the forefront of the Claimants'
arguments, were put before the Tribunal in that case, namely that the search terms
were not specified in the Secretary of State’s certificates and that they were selected
without reference to the judiciary or ministers.

85.	Another complaint made before us, which again has not been in the forefront of
argument, is referred to in paragraphs 19ff of the judgment, namely the untargeted
nature of a s8(4) warrant; this is rejected in paragraphs 19 to 22 of the judgment.

86.	In paragraphs 29 to 31 of the judgment, the Tribunal addresses issues of
foreseeability, and reference was made to paragraph 67 of the judgment in Malone,
to which we have referred in paragraph 30 above. The judgment continued as
follows:

“30. The Respondents' Counsel placed considerable reliance
upon the decision of the Commission in Christie v United
Kingdom [1993] 78-ADR 119. This decision took express
account of, and referred to, Kruslin and Huvig (at 132). It was
considering the very legislation now before us (save that it
related to the predecessor statute, the Interception of
Communications Act 1985, the terms of s2(2) of which were
materially identical to s5(3) of RIPA). It was not a question of a
judicial order for evidence leading to its admissibility in court.

The issue related to authorised interception of telexes received

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

from trade unions in Eastern Europe, which had been
considered necessary under s2(2) (now s5(3)). Accessibility
and foreseeability were addressed, and there was express
reference not only to the Sunday Times judgment but also to
paragraph 67 of the Malone judgment. The Commission
concluded at 133ff as follows:”

"The Government contend that the terms of the relevant
legislative provisions sufficiently indicate the type of activity
likely to be susceptible to interception of communications,
and that safeguards are imposed that regulate the retention
and use of information obtained from interceptions.

The Commission notes that the case law of the Commission
and Court establishes that the requirement of foreseeability
in the special context of sectors affecting national security
cannot be the same as in many other fields. In the Leander
case [[1987] 9 EHRR 433] the Court stated:

"Thus, it cannot mean that an individual should be
enabled to foresee precisely what checks will be made
in his regard by the Swedish special police service in
its efforts to protect national security. Nevertheless, in
a system applicable to citizens generally ... the law has
to be sufficiently clear in its terms to give them an
adequate indication as to the circumstances in which
and the conditions on which the public authorities are
empowered to resort to this kind of secret and
potentially dangerous interference with private life ... "

The Commission recalls that it has considered the compatibility
with the requirements of foreseeability of the partial definition
of "interests of national security" ... in two previous cases,
Esbester v United Kingdom [[1994]18 EHRR CD 72] ... and
Hewitt and Harman v United Kingdom [Commission decision
1.9.93] ... It considered that the principles referred to above
did not necessarily require a comprehensive definition of the
notion of "the interests of national security", noting that many
laws, which by their subject matter require to be flexible, are
inevitably couched in terms which are to a greater or lesser
extent vague and whose interpretation and application are
questions of practice. It held that, given the express limitations
on the exercise of the Security Service's functions and the
supervision of a Tribunal and Commissioner, the law was
formulated with sufficient precision ...

While, as the applicant points out, the provisions of the 1985 ...
[Act] are not subject to the influence of the adversarial input
which forms part of the judicial process of interpretation, the
Commission does not consider that the concept of foreseeability
requires that questions of interpretation and practice must be

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

decided in a judicial forum. It is compatible with the
requirements of foreseeability that terms which are on their
face general and unlimited are explained by administrative or
executive statements and instructions, since it is the provision
of sufficiently precise guidance to enable individuals to
regulate their conduct, rather than the source of that guidance,
which is of relevance (cf ... Silver v UK [1983] 5 EHRR 347).

In light of the above, the Commission considers that the scope
and manner of exercise of the powers to intercept
communications and make use of the information obtained are
indicated with a requisite degree of certainty to satisfy the
minimum requirements referred to above.

The Commission thus concludes that any interference in the
present case was "in accordance with the law".

31.	The Complainants' Counsel submits that Christie and the
two previous decisions referred to can be distinguished, since,
although the issue addressed related to the identical statutory
provision, the precise point now being taken was not
addressed, namely one directed towards the absence of
selection criteria. As will be seen however, it is the
Respondents' submission that s5(3) supplies the answer to the
Complainants' new submission also, such that, if that be right,
the submission is both not new and answered by Christie.

32.	The nub of the Complainants' contention is that this is a
case which falls within Silver, because there is no answer
provided by the statute, and no other guidelines, published or
available, which supply an answer to the requirement of
accessibility or foreseeability:

32.1 Although the Complainants' expert referred to a case presented to the
Constitutional Court in the Federal Republic of Germany, [this must be a
reference to Weber, which was not yet before the ECtHR] in which there
was reference made to a list of search terms which could or might be used
as a filtering system prior to accessing material (although, as the
Respondents' Counsel points out, he does not himself appear actually to say
that the German search terms were ever published, as opposed to an
account being given to the German Constitutional Court), the
Complainants' Counsel does not suggest that, in order to comply with the in
accordance with law doctrine there would have to be publication in the
United Kingdom of a list of search terms. Such a course would in our
judgment be both risky and pointless; risky because it would or might,
contrary to the principle enunciated in paragraph 67 of Malone, enable
those intending to participate in secret communications to avoid the use of
words which would be known to appear in the search list; and pointless
both for that reason and because any accessing of information intercepted

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

pursuant to a s8( 4) warrant would be bound to be fact specific, and what
was being looked for would depend upon the subject matter of the warrant.

32.2 At the end of the day the Complainants' Counsel's submission is a
simple one. He is in no position, he submits, to guess at what should be
said, but he simply submits that something more should be said, by way of
indication as to selection criteria than is presently stated, and that the
selection should not be left simply to the discretion of officials.

33.	The Respondents' response is unequivocal. They refer to
paragraph 22 of the statement mentioned above in paragraph
14:

" ... This process under section 8(4) permits selection and
examination of the selected material only to the extent that to
do so would be necessary in the interests of national
security, to prevent or detect serious crime or to safeguard
the economic well-being of the United Kingdom. In this
regard and generally, section 8(4) is to be read in
conjunction with section 15 of RIPA, which in subsection
(1)(b) specifically makes section 8(4) warrants subject to
arrangements for ensuring that the requirements of section
16 of RIPA are satisfied (namely "that intercepted material
is read, looked at or listened to by the persons to whom it
becomes available by virtue of the warrant to the extent only
that it has been certified as material the examination of
which is necessary as mentioned in section 5(3)(a), (b) or

(c)) ”. It is the duty of the Secretary of State to ensure that
such arrangements are in force that he considers necessary
for securing that the requirements of s16 are satisfied."

34.	The selection criteria in relation to accessing a large
quantity of as yet unexamined material obtained pursuant to a
s8(4) warrant (as indeed in relation to material obtained in
relation to a s8(1) warrant) are those set out in s5(3). The
Complainants' Counsel complains that there is no "publicly
stated material indicating that a relevant person is satisfied
that the [accessing] of a particular individual's telephone call
is proportionate". But the Respondents submit that there is
indeed such publicly stated material, namely the provisions of
s6(l) of the Human Rights Act which requires a public authority
to act compatibly with Convention rights, and thus, it is
submitted, imposes a duty to act proportionately in applying to
the material the s5(3) criteria. 35 * *

35.	To that duty there is added the existence of seven
safeguards listed by the Respondents' Counsel, namely (I) the

criminal prohibition on unlawful interception (2) the
involvement of the Secretary of State (3) the guiding role of the
Joint Intelligence Committee ("JIC") (4) the Code of Practice

(5)	the oversight by the Interception of Communication

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

Commissioner (whose powers are set out in Part IV of the Act)

(6)	the availability of proceedings before this Tribunal and (7)
the oversight by the Intelligence and Security Committee, an
all-party body of nine Parliamentarians created by the
Intelligence Services Act 1994, whose operation is described in
the Respondents' evidence. The existence of the Commissioner
and the Tribunal alone expressly weighed with the Commission
in its decision in Christie.

36.	It is plain that, although in fact the existence of all these
safeguards is publicly known, it is not part of the requirements
for accessibility or foreseeability that the precise details of
those safeguards should be published. The Complainants'
Counsel has pointed out that it appears from the Respondents'
evidence that there are in existence additional operating
procedures, as would be expected given the requirements that
there be the extra safeguards required by s 16 of the Act, and
the obligation of the Secretary of State to ensure their existence
under sI5(1)(b). It is not suggested by the Complainants that
the nature of those operating procedures be disclosed, but that
their existence, i.e. something along the lines of what is in the
Respondents' evidence, should itself be disclosed in the Code of
Practice.

37.	We are unpersuaded by this. First, such a statement in the
Code of Practice, namely as to the existence of such
procedures, would in fact take the matter no further than it
already stands by virtue of the words of the statute. But in any
event, the existence of such procedures is only one of the
substantial number of safeguards which are known to exist.
Accessibility and foreseeability are satisfied by the knowledge
of the criteria and the knowledge of the existence of those
multiple safeguards. 38

38.	It is in those circumstances that the Respondents submit, by
reference to the criteria in s5(3), as exercised with
proportionality and the existence of the multiple safeguards,
that both the question and the answer are the same as in
Christie. We agree. It is clear from the Sunday Times case at
para 49 that foreseeability is only expected to a degree that is
reasonable in the circumstances, and the circumstances here
are those of national security, as discussed in Klass and
Leander. This is not a Silver case where the legislation itself
was inadequate and the guidelines were unpublished. In this
case the legislation is adequate and the guidelines are clear.
Foreseeability does not require that a person who telephones
abroad knows that his conversation is going to be intercepted
because of the existence of a valid s8(4) warrant. The "why
me?" test is as inapt in this case as it would have been found to
be by the Court of Appeal in its recent decision in R ex parte

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

Gillan and Another v Commissioner of Police for the
Metropolis [2004] 3 WLR 1144, at paragraph 50 of the
judgment of the Court given by Lord Woolf LCJ, in relation to
the subject of a valid stop and search order."

87.	We see no reason to doubt these conclusions, albeit not binding upon us, always
subject to what we have said in paragraph 82 above, in relation to the matters not
then argued, and in particular the absence of Weber:

i)	The Claimants point out that the decision in Gillan, to which the Tribunal
referred in paragraph 38 of its judgment, has been subsequently effectively
overruled by the ECtHR decision in Gillan v United Kingdom [2010] 50
EHRR 45. However, apart from the inappropriateness of the question “why
me?”, which does not appear to us to have been essential to the Tribunal’s
conclusions, the conclusory passage in paragraphs 77 to 79 of the ECtHR’s
judgment in that case does not appear to us to flaw the Tribunal’s conclusion,
nor to lead to a conclusion different from that reached by the Tribunal, namely
the Court’s requirement in paragraph 77 that:

“For domestic law to meet these requirements it must afford a measure of
legal protection against arbitrary interferences by public authorities with
the rights safeguarded by the Convention . . . it would be contrary to the
rule of law . . .for a legal discretion granted to the executive to be expressed
in terms of an unfettered power"",

such as the Court found there to be in Gillan, and the Tribunal did not find
in the British Irish Rights Watch case.

ii)	The Claimants also point out that in Liberty v UK at paragraph 63, the
ECtHR stated that its “approach to the foreseeability requirement in this field
has . . . evolved since the Commission considered the United Kingdom’s
surveillance scheme in its decision in . . . Christie"". But Christie and
Esbester (see paragraph 40 above), to which the Tribunal also referred, were
both cited without disapproval in Kennedy. We see no reason, particularly as
the Tribunal expressly referred to and relied upon Malone and Leander, to
differ from its conclusion, by reference to foreseeability. Further we see no
reason, bearing in mind the Tribunal’s findings in that case, to conclude that,
in whatever respect the ECtHR was of the view in Liberty v UK that the
Court’s jurisprudence had evolved since Christie, the Tribunal’s conclusions
as to accessibility and foreseeability in that case should be regarded as in any
way flawed.

88.	In Liberty v UK the ECtHR in fact came to consider the same factual complaint as
the Tribunal was addressing in British Irish Rights Watch in 2004, in its judgment
of July 1 2008; but in the event the Court considered the proceedings by reference to
an earlier application, made by reference to the predecessor Act of the RIPA,
namely the Interception of Communications Act 1985 (“IOCA”). Not only was the
Court addressing the earlier statutory regime, but it was also, for the same reason,
addressing a regime which did not have the Code under s.71 of RIPA referred to in
paragraphs 69 and 75-76 above, which had not been brought into force under the old
Act.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

89.	The somewhat peculiar circumstances were thus that the Court was considering the
case without the benefit of the Code, that the Respondent Government was having
to justify the statutory measures without, and antedating, the Code; the finding was,
perhaps not surprisingly, that, without the Code, the interference with the
applicant’s rights under Article 8 was not therefore in accordance with the law. In
paragraph 65 of the Liberty v UK judgment the Court pointed out that IOCA
conferred a wide discretion, and in paragraph 66 that the arrangements, which the
Government described as applying to the processes of selection for examination,
dissemination and storage of intercepted material, were not contained in legislation
or otherwise made available to the public. The Court concluded:

“68 . . . In the United Kingdom, extensive extracts from the
Code of Practice issued under s. 71 of the 2000 Act are now in
the public domain, which suggests that it is possible for the
state to make public certain details about the operation of a
scheme of external surveillance without compromising national
security.”

90.	This was thus a decision in relation to the s.8(4) warrant, but made on the basis set
out above, which clearly sets out, at the very least, a strong inference that with the
Code the situation would have been different. On the other hand, once again, of the
Four Questions set out before us, the first, second and fourth were not before them,
although the third plainly was, since Weber was considered.

91.	The ECtHR did consider RIPA in Kennedy. This was an application by Mr
Kennedy to the Court arising out of the dismissal by this Tribunal of a complaint by
him relating to a s.8(1) warrant. Although the Court plainly did not therefore
consider s.8(4) in any detail, it did consider those parts of the Statute and of the
Code which apply to both warrants, and the statutory scheme, including oversight
by the Commissioner and this Tribunal. It concluded as follows in paragraph 169:

“In the circumstances, the Court considers that the domestic
law on interception of internal communications together with
the clarifications brought by the publication of the Code
indicate with sufficient clarity the procedures for the
authorisation and processing of interception warrants as well
as the processing, communicating and destruction of intercept
material collected. The Court further observes that there is no
evidence of any significant shortcomings in the application and
operation of the surveillance regime. On the contrary, the
various reports of the Commissioner have highlighted the
diligence with which the authorities implement RIPA and
correct any technical or human errors which accidentally
occur. Having regard to the safeguards against abuse in the
procedures as well as the more general safeguards offered by
the supervision of the Commissioner and the review of the IPT,
the impugned surveillance measures, insofar as they may have
been applied to the applicant in the circumstances outlined in
the present case, are justified under Article 8(2)."

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

Again, of the Four Questions before us, the first, second and fourth were not asked
of the Court: the third plainly was, albeit in the context of a s.8(1) warrant.

92.	Before turning to consider the questions before us, we first further address the
Commissioner’s Report. Based upon the investigations he carried out, he reached
conclusions as to the operation of s.8(1) and s.8(4) and the warrants thereunder, and
the Respondents’ retention, storage and destruction policies and procedures,
including whether there is an indiscriminate or excessive retention of intercept
(particularly in paragraphs 3.55-56 and 6.5 and 6.6), and (in paragraphs 6.6.8-9) he
expresses his own caveats. Leaving aside his factual findings, his Report illustrates
the scope and depth of his oversight duties and activities. It also discloses, by its
very publication, considerable information into the public domain so far as
compatible with the needs of national security. The role of the Commissioner, and
his clearly independent and fully implemented powers of oversight and supervision,
were addressed in detail with approval by the ECtHR (notwithstanding what was
said in paragraph 67 of Liberty) in Kennedy, at paragraphs 57 to 74, 166 and 168.
We make clear, however, that we reach our own conclusions, not least in the
circumstances set out in paragraphs 45 and 46 above.

93.	We turn now to the first question which we have set out in paragraph 80 above,
relating to external/internal communications. As is clear from RIPA, s.8(1), the
targeted warrant is to be directed to one person or to a single set of premises:
presumably that is likely to be in the UK, but it does not need to be. The s.8(4)
warrant is not so targeted and not so limited, but can extend to substantial quantities
of communications, not just as this Tribunal discussed in the British Irish Rights
Watch case, but contained in ‘bearers’ carrying communications to many countries.
By s.8(5), set out above, the communications that are permitted to be intercepted are
(a) external communications and (b) by virtue of s.5(6) and s.8(5)(b) all related
communications data and any other communications (i.e. internal communications)
which are necessarily intercepted in order to do what is authorised by the warrant.
As to this, the inevitable intermingling of external and internal communications was
apparent in Lord Bassam’s statement in Parliament (paragraph 68 above) and is
addressed in paragraph 5.1 of the Code (paragraph 69 above).

94.	The following is common ground between the parties, as Mr Ryder, who bore the
brunt of these submissions, made clear:

i)	It is impossible to differentiate at the ‘interception’ stage between external and
internal communications, which will all be carried within the same ‘bearer’.

ii)	It is impossible to know at the time of interception, i.e. in the course of
transmission, what is external and what is internal, and such has always been
the case:

a)	The definition of interception in s.2(2) of RIPA refers (as set out
above) to transmission “to a person other than the sender or intended
[our underlining] recipient of the communication” i.e. it is (or may be)
intercepted before receipt.

b)	Again as set out above, s.2(7) provides that transmission of a
communication is to include the time when the communication has

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

arrived but is being stored pending collection by the intended recipient
- e.g. stored on an email server.

iii)	It is inevitable that, when a telephone call is made from a mobile phone or
IPhone, or an email is sent to an email address, it will not necessarily be
known whether it will be received in the United Kingdom or in the course of
travel or at a foreign destination. It is accepted that once and if received
abroad by the intended recipient it will be an external communication, even if
the sender did not know, when he or she made the call or sent the email, that
that was to be the case.

95.	It is also common ground that the interception under a s.8(4) warrant (what the
Respondents call “Stage one”) occurs before any question of selection for
examination (what the Respondents call “Stage two”) arises under s.16. As Mr
Ryder put it, the relevance of the internal/external distinction has no relation to the
s.16 examination, when a communication may be accessed and read. The
identification of communication links for interception is, as he described it, a
‘generic’ exercise, not an exercise which is done specifically case by case and
communication by communication.

96.	This is the context of the Claimants’ case, namely that there has been a sea-change
in technology since 2000 which means that, by virtue of the blurring of the
distinction between external and internal communications, s.8(4) is no longer, as
the ugly phrase has it, based upon a misquotation of the Sale of Goods Act, ‘fit for
purpose’. The background upon which the Claimants rely is that there are (as is
obviously the case) many more emails and other similar communications since 2000
(and certainly less landline communications), and that, in addition, there are highly
developed and greatly used new forms of communication through Facebook,
Twitter and Google, in its various facets. They submit that, given that the servers,
particularly for Facebook and Google, are likely to be in the United States, there is
likely to be substantially more external communication than there was in 2000,
particularly so by virtue of what he submits to be an incorrect interpretation of what
is an external communication adopted by Mr Farr and disputed by Mr Eric King, the
Deputy Director of Privacy, who has also filed a witness statement.

97.	It is necessary to indicate the ambit of this dispute:

i)	There is no dispute that emails sent to an email address will still be likely to be
in transmission when intercepted (see above). There is also no dispute that if
an email is sent to more than one addressee, and one of the addressees is
abroad, then there is an external communication to that addressee, even if not
to the others. It is also not disputed, in accordance with Lord Bassam’s
statement and the Code, that if an email is sent via a server which is abroad,
such as Hotmail, that that is not an external communication if the addressee
receives it in the UK, irrespective of the fact that it has been transmitted to,
and stored, until called down, on a US server. ii)

ii)	It is also not disputed that if Google is used as a search engine to navigate the
internet in order to find a web page or addressee abroad, for example such as
Wikipedia, then, if e.g. Wikipedia is abroad, that is external.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

iii)	It is also not in dispute that a Facebook message which is posted to a US
server and picked up by a recipient abroad is an external communication.

iv)	The disputes between Mr Farr (paragraphs 132 to 141) and Mr King
(paragraphs 32 to 55) revolve primarily around (i) other uses of Google, where
Mr Farr considers that a message is sent to Google or a Google entity/platform
in the United States, and a message is then sent back (ii) other uses of
Facebook - e.g. placing a message on the US Facebook page or (iii) Twitter.
In each of these cases Mr King considers that (absent the common ground
referred to above) the communications are or remain internal. It was apparent
that much of the dispute related to the difference between what is interpreted
as a “communication’" within s.81 of RIPA, which includes the definition, at
(c), that communication includes “signals serving either for the impartation of
anything between persons, between a person and a thing or between things or
for the actuation or control of any apparatus.”

98.	It is clear to us that this dispute, although it is one that plainly cannot be resolved by
us on disputed witness statements, is, in the context, of very limited ambit:

i)	Of the respects in which it is common ground that external and internal
communications are either intermingled or impossible to differentiate at the
interception stage (set out in paragraphs 94 to 95 above), all were present,
foreseeable and foreseen at the time of the passage of RIPA by Parliament in
2000.

ii)	There is in any event no dispute about the communications which will be
contained on the same bearers, namely incoming communications into the
United Kingdom from abroad. They are likely to be substantial, and will
qualify as external communications, thus diminishing yet further the
proportionality of consideration of the intermingling of the outgoing
communications.

iii)	Although the changes in technology are substantial, they do not seem to us,
given the common ground to which we have referred, to constitute any
material addition to the quantity (or proportion) of communications which
either could or could not be differentiated as being internal or external at the
time of interception.

99.	Mr Eadie submits, if necessary, that he can rely upon the concept of the “always
speaking statute", referred to by Lord Bingham of Cornhill in R (Quintavalle) v
The Health Secretary [2003] 2 AC 687, and addressed in that and the subsequent
Quintavalle case in [2005] 2 AC 561, so far as concerns the meaning of the word
external.

100.	It appears to us that there is no need to adopt that concept in order to be satisfied
that “external communications"" for the purposes of s.8(4) and s.8(5) of RIPA still
mean the same and have the same effect. Even if, as is suggested, more (outgoing)
communications are external, or there is some genuine dispute, capable of being
resolved if necessary, as to its meaning in relation to some or many of such
communications, insofar as the Claimants complain of the sweep up of
telecommunications cables, that has always been the case. The same total quantity

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

of internal and external communications is likely to have continued to be
intercepted, and permitted in the event of an appropriate s.8(4) warrant, complying
inter alia with the concepts of necessity and proportionality, and properly authorised
by the Secretary of State, as provided by s.8(5) and s.5(6) and the Code. There is no
radical change, notwithstanding the dispute about some parts of the
communications. We are not satisfied that any provision in RIPA has become itself
ambiguous. If Mr Farr’s interpretation is incorrect, then at worst it has, as Mr Jaffey
himself submitted, “accelerated the process of more things in the world on a true
analysis being external than internal”, but at the ‘generic’ stage of interception.

101.	In our judgment, there are only two consequences of this ‘acceleration’, given that,
as is clear, and set out above, the distinction only arises at “Stage one”, when there
is no examination:

i)	AH communications, whether they be external or internal, intercepted by
s.8(4) warrant come to be considered for examination by reference to s.16 of
RIPA, to which we turn below. It is that section which does what Mr Ryder
called in argument the “heavy lifting”.

ii)	The only impact, in our judgment, that could arise would be if Mr Farr’s
interpretation were incorrect, and it were the case that a warrant under s.8(4)
had been granted by express reference to it, and thus on an arguably false
basis. However, given that such warrants and such interception would be likely
to be applied for on a “generic basis”, and a bearer sought to be intercepted
would be bound to include, for the reasons that we have given, a substantial
quantity of communications which would be on any basis either external or at
any rate inchoate external communications in the sense discussed above, it
would seem to us not to follow that any such warrant would be so flawed.
Plainly if a warrant, for example a warrant issued impacting upon these
Claimants (if in due course it later becomes apparent, in subsequent closed
consideration or otherwise, that there has been such a warrant) were applied
for or granted on the basis of express reliance upon such an arguably flawed
basis, then it would be at that stage that the question would arise, and would
need to be resolved.

102.	We resolve the First Question in favour of the Respondents. No difference of view
as to the precise definition of external communications renders the s.8(4) regime
contrary to Article 8(2).

103.	The Second Question relates to s.16. There is no doubt that s.16 is to be regarded as
a safeguard for some of those whose communications have been intercepted under a
s.8(4) warrant, either by reference to external communications or to those internal
communications collaterally included under the warrant, so far as the effect of
s.16(2) is concerned. By that subsection (in general terms), communications so
intercepted could not be accessed (read, looked at or listened to) by reference to an
individual known to be in the UK in relation to communications sent by him or to
him. The sideline to the Statute refers to s.16 as an “extra safeguard in the case of
certificated warrants”, and the Commissioner has described it as a safeguard in
paragraph 6.5.54 of his Report. We have referred to Mr Ryder’s reference to s.16
doing the “heavy lifting”, and we do not accept that it is simply, as Mr Eadie put it

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

in reply submissions, “procedural". We shall return later to the context in which he
so submitted.

104.	There are two respects in which the Claimants submit that s.16 fails as a safeguard.
The first was addressed by Mr Ryder by reference to the terms of s.16(2). He
submits that the two provisos there contained in relation to access to intercepted
material are insufficient. As to (a), that material will not be accessed according to a
factor which is referable to an individual who is known to be in the UK, he submits
that this is inadequate. Referable to is not wide enough or not sufficiently clear; and
known to be, as opposed to suspected to be, is too low a hurdle.

105.	We do not accept either of these submissions. Referable to is in our judgment a
wide term, and generally accepted to be so as a matter of statutory construction, and
would prohibit the use of terms which were connected with, or could lead to the
identity of, the individual by the use of names, nicknames, addresses, descriptions
or other similar methods. If it was more specific, it would become unworkable. To
impose an obligation upon the Respondents not to read the communication if the
presence of the individual in the UK is simply suspected would impose far too high
an obligation, particularly in the course of extended examination of substantial
numbers of communications. The ability to use the communications data/metadata
(to which we return below) would render it a manageable task to ascertain whether
the individual could be said to be known to be in the UK. As for the concomitant
subparagraph (b), we do not consider that this is too limited a restriction: the aim is
to prevent access to communications sent by or sent to an individual who is in the
United Kingdom.

106.	We turn to the second criticism of s.16, which was the subject of a two-pronged
attack by Mr Ryder and Mr Jaffey. Mr Ryder pointed out that s.16 does not exclude
examination of the related communications data, permitted by s.5(6)(b) and s.8(5)
to be included with the communications under a s.8(4) warrant, because the words
intercepted material, as defined in s.20 (set out above), refers to “the contents of any
communications intercepted by an interception to which the warrant relates”, and
thus not to communications data (separately there defined).

107.	Mr Jaffey further points out that, once the communications data could be examined,
such examination was not limited to the purpose for which the warrant had been
given, but could be carried out for any purpose falling within s.5(3)(a)(b) or (c) -
national security, preventing or detecting serious crime, safeguarding the economic
wellbeing of the UK. This is therefore a much less satisfactory safeguard than if it
extended to the exclusion of examination of contents and related communication
data.

108.	Communications data under RIPA are explained in Privacy’s Reply (paragraph 21)
as including the following:

“Data associated with emails:

•	Sender’s name, email, and IP address

•	Recipient’s name and email address

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

•	Date, time, and time zone in which email is sent and
received

Data associated with mobile phones:

•	Phone number of every caller

•	Serial numbers of phones involved

•	Time of call

•	Duration of call

•	Cell site location

Data associated with web browsers:

•	Activity including pages the user visits and when visited

•	User IP address, internet service provider, device
hardware details, operating system, and browser
version. ”

109.	Mr King and Mr Brown, Associate Professor at the Oxford Internet Institute, who
also made a witness statement on behalf of Privacy, have explained how useful
metadata can be in supplying information about the location and correspondents of
the sender, derived from the header of an email, including its timing, particularly in
aggregation with other such data. The Claimants point to the fact that
communications data have been the subject of protection under Article 8 in
Copland v UK [2007] 45 EHRR 37 and, by analogy with EU law (and the Charter
of Fundamental Rights of the European Union), to be derived from Digital Rights
Ireland v Minister for Communications and Others [2014]
ECLI:EU:C:2014:238.

110.	The Claimants submit that, without the same protection for communications data as
is extended to contents, such data can be used for what they call ‘Big Data’, namely
the building up of a database, whose retention can then be justified by reference to
s.15(3) and (4), on the basis that it was or was likely to become necessary for one of
the permitted purposes. The Claimants submit that Mr Eadie was trying to play
down the safeguard as merely ‘procedural so as to avoid confessing the weakness
which the ability to access metadata, related to communications which could not
themselves be accessed, revealed in his defence of the system. 111

111.	The Respondents counter as follows. First, although they may be driven to accept
that Convention jurisprudence allows that there can be interference with Article 8
by reference to the storing of metadata, nevertheless there is no authority for the
kind of drastic proposition of exclusion of access to metadata for which the
Claimants are contending. In Digital Rights, the European Court made it clear, in
paragraphs 59 to 60 of its judgment, that its invalidating of the Directive which
required storage (for any period) of metadata by the communications networks was
on the ground of an absence of “any relationship between the data whose retention

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

is provided for and a threat to public security” and “any objective criterion by
which to determine limits of the access of the competent national authorities to the
data”. That is plainly not so here, where the s.8(4) warrant will have been granted.
Mr Eadie submitted that, notwithstanding the evidence of Mr King and Mr Brown,
interference with communications data is plainly less intrusive than access to the
contents of the communications, and less informative. In that context, he submitted
that although in Malone, at paragraph 84, the Court decided that access to metering
information amounted to an interference with an Article 8 right, it plainly concluded
that it was to be “distinguished from interception of communications”, by virtue, he
says, of its lesser degree of intrusion. He referred also to the passage in Uzun,
which we have quoted in paragraph 34 above, as supporting the same conclusion.

112.	As for the justification for any interference with Article 8, Mr Eadie submitted as
follows:

i)	S.16(2) is clearly in accordance with law. He set out the reasons for the
exemption of communications data, namely that the metadata enabled
compliance with the difficult task imposed by s.16(2) with regards to contents.
He submitted as follows in paragraph 121.5 of his skeleton argument:

“(a) In order for s. 16 to work as a safeguard in relation to
individuals who are within the British Islands, but
whose communications might be intercepted as part of
the s8(4) Regime, the Intelligence Services need
information to be able to assess whether any potential
target is “for the time being in the British Islands ” (for
the purposes of s. 16(2)(a)). Communications data is a
significant resource in this regard.

(b) In other words, an important reason why the
Intelligence Services need access to related
communications data under the s.8(4) Regime is
precisely so as to ensure that the s. 16 safeguard works
properly and, insofar as possible, factors are not used
at the selection that are - albeit not to the knowledge of
the Intelligence Services - “referable to an individual
who is ...for the time being in the British Islands”."

This was, he submitted, plainly the express, and sensible, purpose of
Parliament.

ii)	The structure of s.16 is quite clear, and amounts to the safeguard intended in
respect of the operation of the s.8(4) warrant discussed above. The existence
of the exemption for communications data is nothing new, and had been
intended.

iii)	Communications data are fully protected by the safeguards of s.15(2) handling
and (3) destruction, etc. The protection for communications data is thereby
established, and such protection is only less than for contents, by virtue of
s.16(2), in relation to some communications. If this could be said to be

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

something less than full Weber requirements, then, if, contrary to his
submissions, Weber applies to communications data at all, a lesser protection
is permitted, so far as communications data is concerned, and in any event the
exemption was fully justified, as above.

113.	Mr Ryder did not challenge the suggestion that being able to look at
communications data in order to determine whether someone is in the UK could be
of use, but his submission was twofold. First that that could be achieved by making
an exception to provide for the use of metadata for that purpose. That seems to us
to be an impossibly complicated or convoluted course. His second argument was as
set out above, namely that metadata so obtained could be used (and used as
described by Mr Jaffey) to build up a database - what we described in the course of
his submissions as a ‘just in case’ database, which could still comply with s.15(3)
and (4) of RIP A.

114.	We conclude that although the Weber requirements do extend to protection in
respect of communications data, for the reasons set out by the Respondents there is
such protection or safeguard by reference to s.15, and, insofar as there is, in the
particular circumstances governed by s.16, greater protection in certain respects for
communications than for communications data, that difference is justified and
proportionate by virtue of the use of that communications data for the purpose of
identifying the individuals whose intercepted material is to be protected by
reference to s.16(2)(a). That answers the Second Question. With regard to the
retention of communications data in a database, we return to this matter below.

115.	We turn to consider whether the system, leaving aside s.16, is a sufficient
compliance with Weber and in accordance with law. In our recitation of the
relevant paragraph, 95, of Weber (in paragraph 33 above) we inserted numbers, and
have found it convenient to refer to the six Weber requirements as Weber 1,
Weber 2, etc. We are content to follow, and agree with, the observation of the
ECtHR in paragraph 160 of its judgment in Kennedy that Weber 1 and Weber 2
overlap, and we shall therefore consider them together.

116.	So far as a s.8(4) warrant is concerned, the following seems to be clear:

i) The reference to “national security” is a sufficient description: see Esbester at
CD 74 and Kennedy at paragraph 159, where the ECtHR stated:

“. . .The applicant criticises the terms “national security” and
“serious crime ” as being insufficiently clear. The Court
disagrees. It observes that the term “national security” is
frequently employed in both national and international
legislation and constitutes one of the legitimate aims to which
Article 8(2) itself refers. The Court has previously emphasised
that the requirement of “foreseeability ” of the law does not go
so far as to compel States to enact legal provisions listing in
detail all conduct that may prompt a decision to deport an
individual on “national security” grounds. By the nature of
things, threats to national security may vary in character and
may be unanticipated or difficult to define in advance.”

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

ii)	The absence of targeting at ‘Stage one’ is acceptable and inevitable. This was
so in the Weber case itself (by reference to the ‘strategic monitoring’ being
there addressed). In Liberty v UK the Court criticised the “virtually
unfettered” nature of the legal discretion granted to the executive for the
physical capture of external communications (paragraph 64), but would
appear, rather as in Weber itself, to have concluded that the defect was the
failure to set out with sufficient clarity the scope or manner of such exercise
(paragraph 69), and in particular the absence of the Code, which by then had
been published (paragraph 68).

iii)	The Code was plainly acceptable so far as the s.8(1) warrant is concerned,
when it was fully considered by the Court in Kennedy. Insofar as the Code
was referred to in Liberty v UK (at paragraph 68), no specific complaints
were made or problems identified.

iv)	We heard considerable argument by Mr Ryder as to the appropriateness of
paragraph 5.2 of the Code. Of course it may be that in a given case the
particulars supplied in an application for a warrant would be found to have
been insufficient, although we note the Commissioner’s duties as to the
supervision and inspection of such warrants. We find that on its face
paragraph 5.2 is impressive, and that the provisions of paragraph 5.2,
particularly together with those of paragraphs 2.4 and 2.5 and 5.3, 5.4, 5.5 and
5.6 referred to in paragraph 56 above, dealing with necessity and
proportionality, are satisfactory.

v)	There is in our judgment no call for search words to be included in an
application for a warrant or in the warrant itself. It seems to us that this would
unnecessarily undermine and limit the operation of the warrant and be in any
event entirely unrealistic. It does not appear to us to be in any way demanded
by the Weber requirements. So far as the facts of Weber are concerned, it
appears that some form of notification of search words was required under the
German domestic law. But the facts of Weber are of course not prescriptive,
and, particularly as the outcome was that the Court found that the application
in Weber was “manifestly unfounded”, it does not impose on any other
legislature the requirement either to have some system of search words, (or
indeed to adopt another matter which formed part of the facts of Weber,
namely a provision for some form of notification to the target(s) that there is or
has been a warrant - a proposition that was not argued before us, and in our
judgment rightly so). We agree with the conclusion of this Tribunal in British
Irish Rights Watch that such a course would be both risky and pointless.

vi)	There is also in our judgment no basis for objection by virtue of the absence
for judicial pre-authorisation of a warrant. The United Kingdom system is for
the approval by the highest level of government, namely by the Secretary of
State. The absence of such judicial authorisation in Liberty v UK was not a
matter of criticism, and the Court in Kennedy concluded (at paragraph 167)
that, whereas “it has previously indicated that in a field where abuse is
potentially so easy in individual cases and could have such harmful
consequences for democratic society as a whole, it is in principle desirable to
entrust supervisory control to a judge”, it was satisfied, not only by virtue of
the existence of the Commissioner (then, as now, a distinguished retired

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

Judge), which it had examined at length (as referred to in paragraph 92 above),
but also by virtue of the fact that “the Court highlights the extensive
jurisdiction of the IPT to examine any complaint of unlawful interception’.
This approval of the absence of judicial pre-authorisation was further
addressed by the Court in Telegraaf Media at paragraph 98.

vii)	We have seen nothing to cause us to take a different view from that of the
Tribunal in British Irish Rights Watch, particularly as to the matters set out
in (ii), (v) and (vi) above, which the Tribunal then specifically addressed.

117.	We turn to the consideration of the balance of the Weber requirements, namely (3)
duration of the interception (4) examination, usage, and storage (5) disclosure and

(6)	destruction. Such requirements, or safeguards, are addressed (with the exception
of s.16, to which we have referred) in s.15, which relates both to the contents and to
communications data. These provisions are supported by the following:

i)	The Code. The Code (save for its earlier absence) was not a subject of specific
criticism in Liberty v UK, and, relevantly, because s.15 applies to both s.8(1)
and s.8(4) warrants, was approved in Kennedy.

ii)	The arrangements. These are provided for in sub-sections 15(1), (5) and (6).
There are also the arrangements referred to in paragraph 42 above by
reference to ISA, SSA and CTA, and DPA; and the Code itself makes
reference to the arrangements in force with relation to s.15(2) and s.15(3) and
specifically with regard to s.16, all of which must be recorded in the records
referred to in paragraph 5.17 of the Code.

118.	So far as such arrangements are concerned, they are, in Mr Eadie’s description,
“below the waterline”, and it is true to say that in paragraph 95 of Weber, in setting
out the Weber requirements, the ECtHR referred to the fact that it “has developed
the following minimum safeguards that should be set out in statute law”. However:

(a)	The ECtHR in paragraph 68 of Malone stated that “the detailed
procedures and conditions to be observed do not necessarily have
to be incorporated in rules of substantive law”, which must
“indicate the scope of [the] discretion conferred upon the
competent authorities and the manner of its exercise with sufficient
clarity, having regard to the legitimate aim of the measure in
question, to give the individual adequate protection against
arbitrary interference’. This is repeated in Bykov, in the passage
cited at paragraph 37 above.

(b)	It is clear that actual statute is not required - hence the approval of
the Code in Kennedy (and its anticipated approval in Liberty v
UK). The Code itself, as set out above, refers to the underlying
arrangements. Whether or not the Court in Liberty v UK
considered the Code in detail, and thus noticed the reference in it to
the arrangements, the way the Court dealt with the Code was by
noting (in paragraph 68) that “it is possible for a state to make
public certain details about the operation of the scheme of external
surveillance without compromising national security”. The Court

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

in Kennedy, in specifically approving the availability of reference
to the Code, approved (at paragraph 156) its earlier judgment in
Silver, reference to which had formed part of the conclusion of this
Tribunal in British Irish Rights Watch.

119.	It is plain that what underlies the Weber requirements is that which the Court firmly
articulates in Weber itself at paragraph 106, namely:

“ The Court reiterates that when balancing the interest of the
respondent State in protecting its national security through
secret surveillance measures against the seriousness of the
interference with an applicant’s right to respect for his or
her private life, it has consistently recognised that the
national authorities enjoy a fairly wide margin of
appreciation in choosing the means for achieving the
legitimate aim of protecting national security (see, inter alia,

Klass and Others, cited above, p. 23, § 49; Leander, cited
above, p. 25, § 59; and Malone, cited above, pp. 36-37,

§ 81). Nevertheless, in view of the risk that a system of secret
surveillance for the protection of national security may
undermine or even destroy democracy under the cloak of
defending it, the Court must be satisfied that there exist
adequate and effective guarantees against abuse (see Klass
and Others, cited above, pp. 23-24, §§ 49-50; Leander,
cited above, p. 25, § 60; Camenzind v. Switzerland,
judgment of 16 December 1997, Reports 1997-VIII,
pp. 2893-94, § 45; and Lambert, cited above, p. 2240, § 31).

This assessment depends on all the circumstances of the
case, such as the nature, scope and duration of the possible
measures, the grounds required for ordering them, the
authorities competent to authorise, carry out and supervise
them, and the kind of remedy provided by the national law
(see Klass and Others, cited above, pp. 23-24, § 50).”

This is reiterated in paragraph 77 of the Court’s judgment in Association for
European Integration and Human Rights v Bulgaria App No. 62540/00 28
June 2007.

120.	In that context it is made clear by the Court in S v UK [2009] 48 EHRR 1169 at
paragraph 96 that: “The level of precision required of domestic legislation - which
cannot in any case provide for every eventuality - depends to a considerable degree
on the content of the instrument in question, the field it is designed to cover and the
number and status of those to whom it is addressed’. We have already considered
and set out in paragraphs 38 and 40 above the relevant passages of the Court’s
judgment in Leander and the Commission’s in Esbester. We have no doubt that
we are entitled to look at the rules, requirements and arrangements, both those
expressly set out in statute or in the Code and those set out in more detail in
arrangements below the waterline, but which are sufficiently signalled in publicly
available documents to ensure both that any abuse is avoided and a sufficient degree
of accessibility and foreseeability is secured.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

121.

122.

123.

This is in our judgment not only consistent with the decisions of the ECtHR to
which we have referred, but, although, as is clear from paragraph 67 of Liberty v
UK, oversight (by the Commissioner) was not enough of itself, it is coupled with
the approval by the Court of the oversight arrangements in place in respect of RIPA.
In addition to this Tribunal, there is also the ISC, to which the Court in Kennedy
did not expressly refer, and which, notwithstanding Ms Brimelow’s critique is, we
are satisfied, robustly independent, and now additionally fortified by the provisions
of the JSA which were, according to their Report, referred to in paragraph 6 above,
broadly in line with the changes which they themselves had previously
recommended to the Government. As for the Commissioner, of particular relevance
is his duty under s.57(1)(d) of RIPA to keep under review the adequacy of the
arrangements by virtue of which the duty imposed on the Secretary of State by s.15
are sought to be discharged, and, by reference to s.58(3), his duty if it at any time
appears to him “that any arrangements by reference to which the duties imposed by
s. . . 15 . . have [been] sought to be discharged are proved inadequate in relation to
any matter with which the Commissioner is concerned, to make a report to the
Prime Minister with respect to those arrangements.”

We remain of the same view as this Tribunal in British Irish Rights Watch (at
paragraphs 36 and 37) that it is not necessary that the precise details of all the
safeguards should be published, or contained in legislation, delegated or otherwise.

Against that background, we consider Weber 3, 4, 5 and 6. We have set out the
relevant sections of RIPA in paragraphs 63-67 and 74 above, and set out and
referred to the relevant parts of Chapters 5 and 6 of the Code in paragraphs 69 and
75 above. The Court considered and approved these provisions at paragraphs 161
and 163 to 165 of its judgment in Kennedy, as follows:

“161. In respect of the duration of any telephone tapping, the
Act clearly stipulates, first, the period after which an
interception warrant will expire and, second, the conditions
under which a warrant can be renewed. Although a warrant
can be renewed indefinitely, the Secretary of State himself must
authorise any renewal and, upon such authorisation, must
again satisfy himself that the warrant remains necessary on the
grounds stipulated in section 5(3). In the context of national
security and serious crime, the Court observes that the scale of
the criminal activities involved is such that their planning often
takes some time. Subsequent investigations may also be of some
duration, in light of the general complexity of such cases and
the numbers of individuals involved. The Court is therefore of
the view that the overall duration of any interception measures
will depend on the complexity and duration of the investigation
in question and, provided that adequate safeguards exist, it is
not unreasonable to leave this matter for the discretion of the
relevant domestic authorities. The Code explains that the
person seeking the renewal must make an application to the
Secretary of State providing an update and assessing the value
of the interception operation to date. He must specifically
address why he considers that the warrant remains necessary

dávp dopt poip¿\\ uof siuu.uuak uopddoudiui fo spuoodu pdpvpp
dddp oí sdpudSv Supddoudiui sdumbdu ospo dpoj dipj -ggj

ppvA suivmdu uopudpu sp uof uopvoifpsnf dpi ivpi muifuoo
oí sjVAUdiui oivudouddv iv poAvoiAOU dq isnm /viudivm iddoudiui
ivpi sdivjndps dpoj dpj spunouS (g) g uopods uo duvssdOdu
so lUdqi Suiumpu uof spunouS dun udSuoj ou duv dUdi/i sv
uoos sv pddouisdp dq isnm ‘v/vp uo ¡viudivm dpi fo dpvm sdidoo
duv sv ¡¡dM sv ‘v/vp suogvoiunrnmoo pdivpu duv puv ¡viudivm
iddoudiui dpi ivqi sdumbdu y([¡}[ (£)gj uopods pduudouoo
si ¡viudivm iddoudiui fo uoipnuisdp dpi sv uvf sy -pgj

pduiviqo v¡vp fo uoipdioud dpi uof spuvnSdfvs
divnbdpv dppoud ¡viudivm iddoudiui fo uogvoiunrnmoo
puv Suissdooud uo suoispoud dpi ivqi pdifspvs si pnoj dip
‘sdouvismnoup dip uj ■dov¡d ui si SuppA dpunods uof dunpdooud
puis y ■douvuvdp dpunods duvssdOdu dip inoipi w dsopi oí
d¡qissdoovui dq isnui p ‘uvpopuvd uj sso¡ uo ivdupi fo psu dpi
dsiiuiuiiu oí ¡(puudds pduois puv pdjpuvp dq oí ‘¡vudivm pans
fo sdiuviuiuns puv sdidoo sv ¡p¡\\ sv ‘¡vudivm iddoudiui sdumbdu
dpoj dpj pdsopsip dq ppops duvauuns v ¿(pío udpi ‘doiffns
ppiOA\ /viudiviu dpi fo ¿üviuiuns v d,idp¡\\ ivpi puv pdsopsip
dq oí si Aiouq oí spddu /vnppipui dpi sv /viudiviu iddoudiui
dpi fo poniu os ¿(¡uo ivpi sdifiuvp Udppnf ij aaow¡ oí pddu„ v
si dUdpi d.idi/AA ¿(¡uo vivp divoiuniuiuoo oí ludiudumbdu v sv ¡p¡\\
sv douvuvdp ¿(punods fo pAd¡ divudouddv dpi uof ludiudumbdu
v Suisodmi pdsopsip dq uvo /vudiviu iddoudiui uiopM
oí suosudd fo udqiunu dpi spuip ¿(¡puis dpoj dpi ‘uvpopuvd
uj ■dpoj dpi dq pdpiAOud duv siUdiudSuvuuv dpi fo spvpp
udpiuu q 7vudiviu iddoudiui fo uopvoiuniuiuoo uo suoisiAoud
oifpdds sumiuoo puv uopddoudiui mouf pduiviqo vivp
duv dunods oí dov¡d ui duv siUdiudSuvuuv ivpi dunsud oí d/v/y fo
duvpuodjg dpi uo dpip v sdsodiui y¿J}J g¡ uopods ivpi sd¿udsqo
lunoj dpi 7viudiviu iddoudiui fo uopvoiuniuiuoo puv Suissdooud
dpi oí d/ddv poipAi spuvnSdfvs /vudUdS dpi oí sy jg]

■uvdjo dpudpiffns duv uopvpdouvo
puv ¡VAidiidu ‘uopvunp uo suoispoud dpi ivpi sdpnpuoo
lunoj dpj fdAoqv gg pdvuSvuvd dds) MdiAdu snonupuoo udpun
spivuuvAA uppi dddp isnui SdpudSv Supddoudiui ivpi ‘dopovud
ui ‘suvdiu duvssdOdu ud8uo¡ ou duv poip¡\\ s/iiv.iuvaí pouvo
oí d/v/y fo duvpuodg dpi uo dpip dpi ivpi sdsppv dpoj dipj
■pdfqns uopddoudiui dpi oí uo mouf suopvoiunmmoo Suidfpudpi
uof lUVAd/du ud8uo¡ ou duv ddpi ivpi sudpisuoo d/v/y fo
¿úvpuodg dpi d.idi/AA pdppp dq oí lUVUUVAi dpi oí dppdpos dpi ui
suopvf oifpdds uof py dpi ui uoisiAOud osp si dUdpj spunouS
(£)g uopods uo duvssdOdu ud8uo¡ ou si iuvu.ivaí dpi ivpi pdifspvs
si dp dUdi¡A\ iuvu.ivaí v pouvo oí pdSpqo si d/v/g fo duvpuodjg
opt ‘yjj}j (g)6 uopods udpun ‘udpiuuq •spunouS (g)g uopods uo

(uowîîpnc po vo.iddy

Noiana :i)iisir >nv

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

applied an obligation which the Court considers is particularly
important in the context of the powers and duties of the
Commissioner and the IPT.'.""

We have not cited paragraph 162, because that did not relate to the conclusions of
the Court which are common to both s.8(1) and s.8(4) warrants.

124.	There is no call for us to reconsider those conclusions. We need to deal only with
any matters which have been freshly contended before us. Amendments to the
Code have been proposed and published. Mr Farr refers to their origin as follows:

“161. In March 2010, the Home Office published on its website a revised
draft of the Code . . . the draft was subject to a targeted consultation,
lasting 3 months. The aim, in response to the Liberty v UK judgment was to
make public, to the extent possible, further information as to how material
gathered under s.8(4) warrant comes to be examined following
interception. The proposed changes were mainly to chapters 5 and 6.
Some minor corrections and updates were also made."

In the event, the amended Code was never brought into force. The Claimants, while
recognising that there were thus some proposed changes, do not assert that those
changes would resolve their complaints against the existing Code. We have
considered the amendments, and although they may constitute improvements in
methodology and supervision, which we encourage, we do not consider that the
additions call into question the adequacy of the existing Code.

125.	In the light of our careful consideration of the decisions of the ECtHR and our
conclusions in paragraphs 117-124 above, we conclude that, as was the case with
the Prism Issue, we need to be satisfied that there are adequate arrangements in
place to ensure compliance with the statutory framework and the Convention and to
give the individual adequate protection against arbitrary interference, that they are
sufficiently accessible, bearing in mind the requirements of national security, and
that they are subject to oversight.

126.	The Respondents have agreed at and after the closed hearings, in the circumstances
described in paragraph 10 above, also to make the following further Disclosures, by
way of a summary of the evidence in Closed (the numbering continues from that in
paragraph 47):

3.	Those of the Intelligence Services that receive unanalysed intercepted material
and related communications data from interception under a s.8(4) warrant
have internal “arrangements ” that require a record to be created, explaining
why access to the unanalysed intercepted material is required, before an
authorised person is able to access such material pursuant to s.16 of RIPA. 4

4.	The internal “arrangements” of those of the Intelligence Services that receive
unanalysed intercepted material and related communications data from
interception under a s.8(4) warrant specify (or require to be determined, on a
system-by-system basis) maximum retention periods for different categories of
such data which reflect the nature and intrusiveness of the particular data at
issue. The periods so specified (or determined) are normally no longer than 2

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

years, and in certain cases are significantly shorter (intelligence reports that
draw on such data are treated as a separate category, and are retained for
longer). Data may only be retained for longer than the applicable maximum
retention period where prior authorisation has been obtained from a senior
official within the particular Intelligence Service at issue on the basis that
continued retention of the particular data at issue has been assessed to be
necessary and proportionate (if the continued retention of any such data is
thereafter assessed no longer to meet the tests of necessity and
proportionality, such data are deleted). As far as possible, all retention
periods are implemented by a process of automated deletion which is
triggered once the applicable maximum retention period has been reached for
the data at issue. The maximum retention periods are overseen by, and
agreed with the Commissioner. As regards related communications data in
particular, Sir Anthony May made a recommendation to those of the
Intelligence Services that receive unanalysed intercepted material and related
communications data from interception under a s8(4) warrant, and the interim
Commissioner (Sir Paul Kennedy) has recently expressed himself to be content
with the implementation of that recommendation.

5.	The Intelligence Services ’ internal “arrangements ” under SSA, ISA and ss.15-
16 of RIPA are periodically reviewed to ensure that they remain up-to-date
and effective. Further, the Intelligence Services are henceforth content to
consider, during the course of such periodic reviews, whether more of those
internal arrangements might safely and usefully be put into the public domain
(for example, by way of inclusion in a relevant statutory Code of Practice).

127.	The Claimants made the following submissions in response to these further
Disclosures, in addition both to those set out in paragraphs 49-50 above and to
repeating and adopting those they made during the open hearing.

128.	First they submitted that the further information supplied was not adequate, being
contained neither in statute nor in the Code pursuant to s.71 of RIPA. Their
submission was that if the arrangements described were not contained in statutory
form or in a code required to be laid before Parliament then it could be changed and
was thus changeable at an 'executive whim\ by which they referred to the
possibility of change in administrative policy, somewhat pejoratively, given the
inevitable constraints inherent in any such changes. The arrangements were
therefore not suitable to be taken into account in consideration of whether they were
according to law or prescribed by law. They referred to Malone at paragraphs 67,
68 and 76 and Liberty at paragraphs 60-61 and 68.

129.	We are satisfied that this proposition is not to be derived from those authorities,
taken together with the other authorities to which we have referred in detail in
paragraphs 37-38, 85-88, 118-119 and 121-124 above. Particularly in the field of
national security, undisclosed administrative arrangements, which by definition can
be changed by the Executive without reference to Parliament, can be taken into
account, provided that what is disclosed indicates the scope of the discretion and the
manner of its exercise (see in particular paragraph 118(a) above). This is
particularly so where:

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

(i)	The Code, which was the subject of consideration by the ECtHR, latterly in
Kennedy, itself refers to a number of arrangements not contained in the
Code, and even in Liberty (at paragraph 68) the ECtHR required the
disclosure of only “certain details'”.

(ii)	There is the system of oversight, which the ECtHR has approved, which
ensures that such arrangements are kept under constant review.

130.	The Claimants further pointed out, and relied upon the fact, that in Belhadj, referred
to in paragraph 54 above, in which issue is joined between the Respondents and
those claimants (who include, among others, Amnesty) as to the adequacy and
lawfulness of the Respondents’ treatment of intercepted material which may be
subject to legal and professional privilege, in reply to a lengthy Request for
Information served by the claimants, the Respondents supplied a document (referred
to in paragraph 54 above) amounting to a redacted extract from the GCHQ
Compliance Guide. This contained a gisted passage summarising GCHQs “overall
policy" as to “retention limits”. The Claimants submit that they should have been
entitled to see such a document in this case, and suggest that if it did not offend
against national security to supply such document in Belhadj then it would not do
so in this case.

131.	The Belhadj case is very different. It has not yet reached a hearing, but it is still at
the interlocutory stage, and is limited in its scope, as discussed. Apart from a query
as to terminology, by which we are not persuaded, it is not suggested by the
Claimants that the gist of the GCHQ policy (save that it also includes a provision for
retention of certain material to comply with legal requirements) shows anything
materially different from, inconsistent with or additional to the gist that has been
supplied of the closed evidence in this case. What has happened in the present case
is that there has been a closed hearing, at which pursuant to s.68(6) of RIPA the
Respondents were obliged to and did provide the relevant documents. Within the
limits of the same concerns about national security, a summary has then been
provided by the Respondents of the evidence given and documents produced at the
closed hearing, and disclosed to the Claimants. That summary of the evidence is
consistent with the summary provided in Belhadj. We do not see either that there
has been inconsistency or that the Claimants have been prejudiced or treated
materially differently from the claimants in Belhadj.

132.	Two further submissions were made with regard to the Disclosure:

(i)	Whereas in paragraph 3.56 of the Commissioner’s Report, one of the
paragraphs referred to in paragraph 92 above, the Commissioner stated that
he had yet to satisfy himself fully that some of the retention periods were
justified, paragraph 4 of the Disclosure states that he has now made a
recommendation (said to have been implemented). This is not evidence
which could have been given in any detail in open, and is sufficiently
summarised by that paragraph in the Disclosure. (ii)

(ii)	Privacy relies on paragraph 5 of the Disclosure as indicating that there is
more that could be disclosed. It states that there may be yet further review,
resulting in additional disclosure of matters which may in the future be
concluded not to be prejudicial to national security. Plainly, with the

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

assistance of the Commissioner, the position as to what can and cannot
safely be disclosed without prejudicing national security will be kept under
review. That is a welcome approach. It does not mean that there are any
more details which can at present be disclosed without such risk.

133.	At the second open hearing on 31 October, the fact of the disclosure of documents
in the Belhadj case was the subject of discussion and submission, but the Claimants
had not had the opportunity of studying them in full. The Tribunal agreed that they
could put in short further submissions in writing after doing so, in respect of any
matters which arose out of the Belhadj documents once they had fully perused
them. The primary purpose of doing so was in case there were found to be anything
in those documents which appeared to be inconsistent with the content of the
Disclosures. We have addressed that in paragraphs 130-131 above. However
Liberty in particular put in lengthy further written submissions which were not
limited to that point:

(i)	Mr Ryder made an argument that the Belhadj documents should not have
been produced (in part) by way of gisting, but by way of service of the full
document redacted, showing the deletions. Quite apart from the fact that
the Tribunal could not see how this arose for consideration in the present
case, the Tribunal (differently constituted) has given a reasoned judgment
on this very point in Belhadj on 18 November 2014 ([2014] UKIPTrib
13_132-9H_2), to which reference can be made, and which this Tribunal
sees no purpose in reconsidering.

(ii)	A request for disclosure, at this very late stage, of further documents from
the Respondents is now made, by reference to the fact that the Respondents
disclosed (in redacted or gisted form) some extracts of the GCHQ
compliance procedures in the Belhadj case, relating specifically to legal
professional privilege (“LPP”), and it is suggested that similar documents
could now be disclosed by the Respondents in this case (although of course,
as set out in paragraph 130 above, on a basis far wider than a scope which is
limited to LPP). In this case there has been disclosure to the Tribunal by
the Respondents pursuant to s.68(6) of RIPA, as referred to in paragraph
46(iv) above, and there has been a closed hearing at which the documents in
respect of which the Respondents claim protection on national security
grounds have been considered by the Tribunal. The Tribunal in this case is
tasked to judge the adequacy of the arrangements, both above and below
the waterline, and to judge accessibility, by reference to the extent to which
the scope of the discretion of the Respondents is revealed or the nature of
the arrangements is adequately signposted. Particularly at this late stage of
the proceedings, after the close of the hearings, further disclosure to the
Claimants is unnecessary. If there is inadequate signposting above the
waterline of the arrangements below the waterline, then the Respondents
will fail. This is not a case which depends, particularly at this late stage,
upon the need for any further disclosure to the Claimants.

134.	Mr Ryder also sought to introduce in those written submissions a much wider
argument. He submitted that in the light of the late stage in the proceedings (not
until the date of the Respondents’ skeleton on 3 July 2014) at which the
Respondents admitted that the ambit of Article 10 could apply to the investigatory

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

activities of NGOs, it was likely that there was no or no adequate provision for
dealing with confidential information obtained by intercept in that context (“NGO
confidence"). Accordingly in his written submissions dated 17 November 2014 he
asked the Tribunal to direct the Respondents to disclose the original documents
(subject to redaction as appropriate) containing their policies and procedures for the
handling of such confidential material derived from intercept in relevant
circumstances.

135.	It is important to set this very belated request into the context of these proceedings:

(i)	It is right that the Claimants pleaded from the outset that Article 10 applied
to investigatory NGOs as to journalists, and that in the Respondents’
pleadings this was denied.

(ii)	Amnesty in its claim specifically alleged in relation to LPP, but not in
relation to NGO confidence, a case (in particular at paragraph 58(g) of its
grounds) that there was likely to be no or no adequate (or in any event no
accessible) legal framework for the protection of LPP in relation to
intercepted documents.

(iii)	That case was, by an agreed direction of 14 February 2014, hived off to be
dealt with in the Belhadj case, to which Amnesty was joined as an
additional claimant.

(iv)	There was no similar case made in respect of NGO confidence. The issues
in relation to Article 10, as agreed in the 14 February direction were, as
discussed in paragraph 12 above, simply mirror images of the same issues
under Article 8 and raised (save as set out in paragraphs 149 to 151 below)
no further or separate issue.

(v)	The arguments raised on Article 10 were led at the hearing by Liberty,
according to the skeleton arguments served by the Claimants, and Liberty’s
skeleton addressed Article 10 succinctly:

(a)	In relation to the Prism Issue (iii):

"54. For the same reasons the Claimants submitted that the
statutory regime does not satisfy the Article 8(2) “in
accordance with the law ” requirement, it does not satisfy the
Article 10(2) “prescribed by law ” requirement".

(b)	Similarly (mutatis mutandis) in relation to the s.8(4) issues (vi)
and (vii), at paragraphs 102-103 of the skeleton.

(vi)	This is exactly how Article 10 was addressed by the Claimants at the
hearing, as set out in paragraphs 149-152 below, save for the addition of the
argument there addressed, in relation to prior judicial authorisation.

136.	Quite apart from the fact that Liberty’s new argument (set out in 20 paragraphs at
the close of its 17 November 2014 submissions) is not, in the Tribunal’s judgment,
within the ambit of the additional written submissions anticipated or permitted at the

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

31 October hearing, those submissions could have been made at any time even prior
to the Respondents’ skeleton of 3 July 2014, and in tandem with Amnesty’s similar
submissions in relation to LPP, which were hived off into separate proceedings. It
is, in the judgment of the Tribunal, far too late for any such case to be made now,
not to speak of one which is said to require further disclosure and would certainly
require considerable further argument, to be incorporated within the ambit of these
proceedings and at this stage.

137.	It is plain that there are very substantial published procedures in s.15 and the Code,
described above. The Respondents are in our judgment justified in their concern
that disclosure of further particulars of those procedures would reveal and disclose
sensitive and specific details with regard to methods of obtaining and dealing with
information, and reveal the precise capacity and capabilities of the Respondents, and
we are satisfied that no more needs to be disclosed.

138.	We were concerned in the closed hearings to be satisfied in particular as to the
existence of arrangements relating to the duration of retention and destruction of
information the product of intercept or obtained under Prism. The concerns of the
Claimants are that a database can be built up of communications data (including
communications data not excluded by s.16(2), as discussed above) so as to justify a
continuing databank, continuously renewed by reference to the continued necessity
for it for one of the s.5(3) purposes, not necessarily being the statutory purpose for
which the communications data was originally intercepted.

139.	We are satisfied as a result of what we saw and heard at the closed hearings, and the
further Disclosure set out above, that this is not the case and that there are adequate
arrangements, in respect of duration of retention and destruction, to control and
regulate the retention of such material. Such retention, storage and destruction
policies and procedures are also regularly supervised by the Commissioner, as he
makes clear in his Report.

140.	We are satisfied, subject to what we say in paragraphs 153 and 154 below, that the
s.8(4) regime is sufficiently compliant with the Weber requirements and in any
event is in accordance with law, and that paragraph 164 of the ECtHR judgment in
Kennedy (cited in paragraph 123 above) endorses this conclusion. As set out in
paragraph 55(ii) in relation to the Prism Issue, we are satisfied that the s.8(4)
arrangements are sufficiently signposted, in the statute, in the Code, in the
Commissioner’s Reports, and as now recorded in this judgment.

DISCRIMINATION

141.	The discrimination claim arises out of Article 14 of the Convention (read with Article
8): a parallel claim by reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU did
not need to be separately pursued. Article 14 reads as follows:

“The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in this
Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any
ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political
or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a
national minority, property, birth or other status.”

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

The claim is made by reference to differential treatment on the grounds of national
origin.

142.	The case was originally put by the Claimants in the pleadings and submissions by
reference to the alleged difference between s.8(1) as relating to internal and s8(4) to
external communications. This however was not pursued orally, and Mr Jaffey,
supported by Ms Brimelow, made the case by reference to s.16(2) of RIPA.

143.	It is not suggested that there is direct discrimination on nationality grounds. The
case is put by reference to indirect discrimination, by reference to location, and thus
indirectly to national origin. Communications intercepted under a s.8(4) warrant
cannot be read if sent by or to a person located in the UK, by reference to the
s.16(2) procedure discussed at some length above. The exclusion, as discussed
above, is limited to using (in respect of contents) relevant search words to discover
communications, whether external or internal sent to or received by someone in the
UK, and is described, as set out in paragraph 103 above, as a safeguard.

144.	The complaint is that favour is thus shown to those who are located in the UK, so
far as the reading of their communications is concerned. If they are in the UK, they
are more likely to be of UK nationality, and there is thus indirect discrimination
upon grounds of national origin. Direct discrimination on such grounds requires
“very weighty” justification (Gaygusuz v Austria [1996] 23 EHRR 365). This is
however indirect discrimination, and simply requires a rational justification.

145.	The background is of course, as discussed above, that a s.8(1) warrant is a targeted
warrant, and insofar as directed within the UK it avoids the criticism of being a
general warrant (as Mr Jaffey explained by reference to a fascinating exegesis of
English law, back to John Wilkes). The need to avoid a ‘general warrant’ requires
the authorities here to target those they can by more specific methods of
surveillance within the jurisdiction, short of a s.8 warrant. A s.8(4) warrant is
primarily aimed at external communications, and not primarily at those located
here; although the exemption under s.16(2) can be ousted by means of a certificate
under s.16(3).

146.	Mr Jaffey’s submission is that there is thus a detrimental treatment of those who are
not located here, not justifiable on that ground. The Respondents submit that the
system is to deal with an unintended method of surveillance of those in the UK, as
opposed to normal methods which are not available against those abroad.

147.	The Respondents accept that there is an arguable distinction based upon location,
and thus, by reference to the Claimants’ arguments, on a ground by reference to
national origin. They submit however that there is no doubt that there is a rational
justification for such distinction, as follows:

i)	Protection is needed for those against whom otherwise a s.8(4) warrant could
be used to avoid the need for other ‘domestic’ remedies of surveillance, not
available against those abroad. Hence the exceptional nature of a s.16(3)
certificate. ii)

ii)	Given that the purpose of accessing external communications is primarily to
obtain information relating to those abroad, the consequence of eliminating the

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

distinction would be the need to obtain a s.16(3) certificate in almost every
case rather than by way of an exception, and normally without the information
available in respect of those in the UK. The Respondents rely on what they
submit to be obvious, namely that it is harder to investigate terrorism and
crime abroad, and difficult if not impossible to provide a case for a certificate
under s.16(3) in every case, rather than the exceptional. The numbers of those
involved if s.16(3) certificates were extended to those abroad would inevitably
be very substantial (we were provided with figures in closed hearing) and this
would radically undermine the efficacy of the s.8(4) regime. In any event in
relation to a potential target abroad there might not be any or any sufficient
information for a s.16(3) certificate.

148.	As to the Fourth Question, we are persuaded by the Respondents, for the reasons
they put forward, that any indirect discrimination is sufficiently justified. It is quite
plain to us that the imposition of a requirement for a s.16(3) certificate in every case
would radically undermine the efficacy of the s.8(4) regime, given the pre-eminent
role of that regime in the identification of threats to UK national security from
abroad.

Article 10

149.	We return finally to the balance of the argument in relation to Article 10 (referred to
in paragraph 12 above). Article 10 reads as follows:

“(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This
right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to
receive and impart information and ideas without
interference by public authority and regardless of
frontiers. This article shall not prevent States from
requiring the licensing of broadcasting, television or
cinema enterprises.

(2)	The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it
duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are
prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic
society, in the interests of national security, territorial
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or
crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the
protection of the reputation or the rights of others, for
preventing the disclosure of information received in
confidence, or for maintaining the authority and
impartiality of the judiciary.”

It was accepted at the hearing that there is no separate argument in relation to
Article 10(2), over and above that arising out of Article 8(2), save that there may be
a special argument relating to Article 10 with respect to the need for judicial pre-
authorisation of a warrant if such were not necessary, as indeed we have found, in
respect of Article 8. Reference was made by Mr Ryder to Sanoma Uitgevers BV v
The Netherlands [2011] EMLR 4, in which the ECtHR concluded that prior
judicial authorisation was required before the state may seize and retain journalistic

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

material. Since it is common ground for the purposes of this case (see paragraph 12
above) that the Claimants may be entitled to the benefit of any protection under
Article 10 otherwise available to journalists, it was submitted that the consequences
of Sanoma should follow.

150.	The Respondents do not accept that this applies to any context in which Article 10 is
engaged, and in particular point to Telegraaf Media at paragraphs 96-97, in which
the ECtHR made clear that such a case would be limited to where there was targeted
surveillance of journalists with a view to obtaining knowledge of their sources. The
Respondents further refer to the words of Laws LJ in Miranda v the Secretary of
State for the Home Department [2014] 1 WLR 3140, whereby he rejected the
suggested absolute rule of prior judicial scrutiny for cases involving State
interference with journalistic freedom.

151.	We are in any event entirely persuaded that this, which is not of course a case of
targeted surveillance of journalists, or indeed of NGOs, is not such an appropriate
case, particularly where we have decided in paragraph 116(vi) above, that the
present system is adequate in accordance with Convention jurisprudence without
prior judicial authorisation. In the context of the untargeted monitoring by s.8(4)
warrant, it is clearly impossible to anticipate a judicial pre-authorisation prior to the
warrant limited to what might turn out to impact upon Article 10. The only
situation in which it might arise would be in the event that in the course of
examination of the contents, some question of journalistic confidence might arise.
There is, however, express provision in the Code (at paragraph 3.11), to which we
have already referred, in relation to treatment of such material.

152.	The answer to the Article 10 issues is therefore the same as in respect of the Article
8 issues.

CONSEQUENCES

153.	We have therefore reached the necessary conclusions as to the Four Questions set
out in paragraph 80 above: No as to the First, Yes as to the Second and Third and
No as to the Fourth. However, with regard to the First and Third Questions, our
answers are given with the benefit of the Disclosures by the Respondents given in
paragraphs 47-48 and 126 above.

154.	It is apparent that the Disclosures are in each case such that their effect is to reveal
the existence of a safeguard rendering it less, rather than more, likely that there will
be objectionable interference with privacy or arbitrary conduct by the Respondents.
We do not in any event consider that the disclosure (by paragraph 3 of the
Disclosure) of the additional recording obligation, while welcome, makes any
material difference. But it is obvious that the disclosure as to the procedures
relating to the obtaining and treatment of intercept pursuant to Prism is of
significance. We shall invite submissions from the parties as to the consequence in
respect of whether there has been breach of Article 8 prior hereto, only by virtue of
the Disclosures.

155.	The Tribunal is satisfied that no further disclosure is required to be made as to the
detail of the Respondents’ practices and procedures in order to render them
sufficiently accessible. However we in any event consider it of importance that

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

there should be as much transparency as is consistent with the protection of national
security, and welcome the Respondents’ statement recorded at paragraph 5 of the
Disclosure: we encourage the Respondents to continue to see whether more
disclosures can be made even in areas where we have reached no such conclusion.

A SUMMARY

156.	In the course of this judgment we have made detailed reference to the various
statutory and other safeguards and oversights which govern the receipt of
intercepted material in the United Kingdom. Save in one possible (and to date
hypothetical) respect, (see paragraph 53 above), we have ruled that the current
regime, both in relation to Prism and Upstream and to s.8(4), when conducted in
accordance with the requirements which we have considered, is lawful and human
rights compliant; but having regard to the submissions we have received, which
amount to a comprehensive critique of the interception regime, we think it right in
the public interest to describe the essence of what the law provides by way of
human rights protection.

157.	The legislation in force and the safeguards to which we have referred are intended
to recognise the importance of, and the need to maintain, an acceptable balance
between (a) the interests of the State to acquire information for the vital purposes of
national security and the protection of its citizens from terrorism and other serious
crime, and (b) the vital interests of all citizens to know that the law makes effective
provision to safeguard their rights to privacy and freedom of expression, together
with appropriate and effective limits upon what the State does with that information.

158.	Technology in the surveillance field appears to be advancing at break-neck speed.
This has given rise to submissions that the UK legislation has failed to keep abreast
of the consequences of these advances, and is ill fitted to do so; and that in any
event Parliament has failed to provide safeguards adequate to meet these
developments. All this inevitably creates considerable tension between the
competing interests, and the ‘Snowden revelations’ in particular have led to the
impression voiced in some quarters that the law in some way permits the
Intelligence Services carte blanche to do what they will. We are satisfied that this is
not the case.

159.	We can be satisfied that, as addressed and disclosed in this judgment, in this
sensitive field of national security, in relation to the areas addressed in this case, the
law gives individuals an adequate indication as to the circumstances in which and
the conditions upon which the Intelligence Services are entitled to resort to
interception, or to make use of intercept.

160.	We wish to emphasise that whatever the circumstances of the receipt by the
Intelligence Services of intercepted material, the following matters of law are of
paramount importance:

(i) In relation to any material intercepted abroad it would always be unlawful
for the Intelligence Services to use the absence of a warrant as a device
deliberately to circumvent the requirements of UK law by procuring
another State to do what they could not lawfully do themselves.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

(ii)	The indiscriminate trawling for information by interception, whether mass
or bulk or otherwise, would be unlawful, as would be the seeking, obtaining
or retention of material which is unnecessary or disproportionate. In this
context, even if, pursuant to a s.8(4) warrant enabling the interception of
substantial quantities of communications, large quantities are lawfully
intercepted, material can only be then accessed lawfully if it is necessary in
the interests of national security, for the purpose of preventing or detecting
serious crime or for the purpose of safeguarding the economic well being of
the United Kingdom (“the statutory purposes”); and it is only proportionate
if it is proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by lawful conduct.

(iii)	Once it has been accessed by the Intelligence Services, either by specific
targeting or selection, intercepted material, including communications data,
may only be retained for as long as is necessary for the statutory purposes;
thereafter it must be destroyed.

(iv)	In respect of all intercepted information which they receive and retain by
any of these means the Intelligence Services are accountable. The receipt,
handling and destruction of material must be carefully managed, monitored
and recorded, and all this information must be freely available for
inspection by the relevant authorised oversight bodies, who must be given
full and ongoing cooperation in their work.

CONCLUSION

161.	This has been a valuable exercise, in which, with the benefit of full and penetrating
advocacy on all sides, the Tribunal has been enabled to carry out a review of the
systems in relation to both Prism and/or Upstream and the s.8(4) warrant. We have
been able (as we state in paragraph 156) to satisfy ourselves that as of today there is
no contravention of Articles 8 or 10 by reference to those systems. As set out in
paragraphs 153 and 154 above, we have left open for further argument the question
as to whether prior hereto there has been such breach. We shall also proceed,
guided by the submissions we have heard and the conclusions we have reached, to
consider in closed whether there has been in fact any unlawful interception or
treatment of the Claimants’ communications.

Mr Justice Burton (President)

Mr Robert Seabrook QC
Mrs Justice Carr

The Hon Christopher Gardner QC
His Honour Geoffrey Rivlin QC