TOP USA. F'v?E?f

TEC Successfuiiy instaiis BOTANICREALTY at 

In response to a request from 328. MSDC System Development and
Signals Develo ment Lab personnel oollaborated with the TEC to deploy a solution to
oolleot a# video network. When ?rst deteoted. the video was unenorypted. The
video then eoame enorypted over a period of two months. The ourrent demodulation
solution from the TEC is oalled BDTANICREALTY. Originally. was used
to find oarrier aoduisitions and disoover signal oharaoteristios. This provided the
freduenoy range. oarrier rates. and a rough time up and time down for ohannel aotivity.

 

In mid?April. the TEC installed [formerly known as
UNCANNY at in the hopes of looating. identifying. and oolleoting

olear and enorypted video signals found on the

The oolleotion of these si nals. in su ort of

is important to the SE
speoial projeots at the CIA. and in general produot reporting

 
 
   
  

  
 
  

 
 

vanous

Within minutes of the system ooming on line. 
suooessfully oolleoted its ?rst signal matohing the parameters of the enorypted 
video-signals. The hub oontrol ohannels are session enorypted while the
outstations are bqu enorypted video. Sinoe proving the ability to automatioally prooess
these signals of interest at over 1000 oolleots. totaling hundreds of hours
of raw data. have been made and forwarded to oryptanalytio personnel in ICES for
further investigation.

Joint Activity Annuai Report for 2t'l 

(SiiSliiREL) The Joint SIG-INT Aotivity experienoed notable suooesses in its
mission during 200? for NSi??t and the |t'E-erman Federal Intelligenoe Servioe.
or Bundesnaohriohtendienst However. oonourrent with the JSi-?t mission
ohanges. manpower requirements were re?evaluated and reduotions to both oivilian and
oontraotor manning levels were approved with implementation to be oarried out in FY08.

(SiiSliiREL) The past year also saw an expansion of JSi-?t?s partnerships with 550.
and ESDC. with plans to expand these further and inorease support on various
operations in 2008. JSi-?t wi|| oontinue to build on its suooesses and improve its mission
oontribution in oolleotion and SIG-INT development to both NSi-?t and END.

TOP REL TO USA. NET 10

TOP TO USA. F'v?E?f

Highlights for 200?:

JSA engineers developed various analysis tools and an automated seleotor
sanitizing tool. The seleotor sanitization tool oan be used at other sites. inoluding those
working speoial projeots.

The expansion of site oapabilities through the installation and integration of
US. and German systems signi?oantly improved oolleotion and development of high?
priority targets. New or improved oapabilities inolude an automated survey system. ?v?oIP
prooessing and metadata oolleotion oapabilities. a high speed ?ltering system. 
metadata oolleotion oapabilities. and new data flows to NSA for DNI. ?v?oIP and GSM

metadata.

A oloser relationship between ESOC. JSA and BND resulted in new
exploitation of targets in Algeria as well as other A?ioan targets. New TROPICPUMA

fax prooessing oapabilities deployed in Deoember immediate be an to rovide unique
and valuable intelligenoe to ESOC and BND on
The eno used JSA - osrvl oolleotion to identify. traok. alert. and

JSA oontinues to provide oritioal oolleotion of the?
network. providing unique insights into 

NSA personnel oontinued to improve skills through both olassroom
and on?the?job training allowing BND personnel to take on greater roles in DNI

prooessing and analysis.

  

Joint Activinr-Deveioped VoiPSum and Autoi'llorm Toois Used
in Looai Anaiysis. Create Agency-wide interest

JSA has developed and is now using two new number normalization tools
a ?v?oIP Summarization [?v?oIF?Sum} tool and an Automated Normalization [AutoNorm]
tool.

?v'oioe?over?IP [?v?olP} traffio is prevalent at many oolleotion sites. inoluding
JSA. Site engineers have developed a simple tool. oalled ?v'oIF?Sum. to extraot. parse.
and organize ?v?oIP metadata for analysis by Intelligenoe Signals and
developers. ?v?oIF?Sum provides the user with several outputs: a summary file of
oitiesioountries on eaoh oase notation seen in its run. also viewable by web browser; a

TOP REL TO USA. F'v?E?USA. F?v?E?f

file containing URls (Uniform Resource Indicators} and their associated IP addresses; a
file of normalized numbers and location information; and a file of normalization
suggestions for non?normalized numbers. generated with help from AutoNorm.

(SiiSliiREL) Generating normalization rules for can be very dif?cult
without adequate knowledge of a region?s Country Code National Destination
Code (NDC). Local Exchange Office Code (LEDC). and Subscriber Number JSA
has found their in?house developed tool. AutoNorm. a great time saver for generating
rules. AutoNorm works by matching substring combinations of the raw
number against the Global Numbering Database ?at ?le. It provides several input
options: generic. which tries to ?nd an exact match; prelist. which appends a given set
of digits to domestic calls before attempting matches; and sort; which sorts its output
into groups that share the same digits stripped or pre?pended.

(SiiSliiREL) These two tools have been used by JSA to aid in generating
reports and number normalizations and tatget research. Additionally. representatives
from the NAC. lvlisawa. SSG. SEC. and SSD have expressed interest in receiving and
using 'v'olF?Sum and AutoNorm.

(SiiSliiREL) 'v'olF?Sum and AutoNorm are now available for download] For more
information. including user manuals. output examples. and a downloadable tarball.
please visit website. You may also contact the PDCs listed above.

Joint Activity Begins New EMS and Cali Event Datafiollvs for
NBA Anaiysts

(SiiSliiREL) JSA initiated two new dataflows for NSA in April. These new
dataflows are from and DNR collection platforms. The
data is ?owing into DISHFIRE. and the corresponding call event data into FASCIA.
A cursory look at dialing showed

Poland and others. Preliminary data shows that JSA is sending over 
events to DISHFIRE daily. So. let the hunt begin] One can isolate this new data by
guerying in DISHFIRE on PDDG and collection box (RA. This 
collection is being processed on multiple case notations from 
(E9). and with forward and reverse gateways with
{primarily}. However. we also have Tajikistan. Russia. lvlonaco. Lebanon
and UAE gateways represented. As a reminder. JSA has been forwarding data
from its JUGGERNAUT collection platform since 200?.

 

Der Zeitgeist

{Cl Joint Activity 

 

TOP i i REL TO USA. 12

