Statement to LIBE Committee Inquiry on Electronic Mass Surveillance of
EU Citzens

Dr. Reinhard Kreissl IRKS Vienna, Coordinator of IRISS

This is a report about first results from an FP7 research project on increasing resilience
in surveillance societies (IRISS). Given the short time available I will restrict myself to
address a few questions. A more comprehensive account can be found on the project
website1:

(1)	Can encompassing surveillance be considered as an adequate means to combat and
prevent crime and terrorism?

(2)	What are the effects of surveillance in the area of law enforcement?

(3)	Can the spread of surveillance be governed in a politically accountable and rational
way?

Contemporary societies are surveillance societies. Their citizens are machine-readable
techno-social hybrids by default. So these societies lend themselves to large-scale
surveillance based on electronic data processing technology. The idea of a private
sphere becomes problematic under these conditions and can be addressed if at all as a
problem of data protection.

(1)	Surveillance technologies can be used to identify, locate and track individuals. They
also can be used to screen populations and flows of goods, information and money.
Different technologies are combined into assemblages increasing the power and
intrusiveness of surveillance measures. Comprehensive surveillance can help to detect
an incident. It also can help to prosecute offenders, but falls short of preventing crimes
and acts of terrorism from happening. Surveillance is powerful to track a known
individual under suspicion or a suspicious object. It is less useful to identify problematic
situations or individuals in advance.

(2)	Surveillance has different kinds of effects: it creates new categories of individuals
(social sorting); it affects the behaviour of citizens (chilling effect); it shapes the
operation of law enforcement work (intelligence-led policing) and it increases the risk
of abuse (breach of privacy regulation). Under specific conditions surveillance triggers
counter effects that can increase the resilience of civil society against illegitimate
intrusions. A number of public reactions to the Snowdon revelation clearly demonstrate
this. Making surveillance a topic of public debate on the basis of information about the
strategies and technologies in operation can help to reach an informed societal consent
about the use of surveillance.

(3)	Governing surveillance in a rational and accountable way is difficult for several
reasons. Governing surveillance amounts to governing what could be called a security-
industrial complex. Different players with different interests sustain a situation with
increasing demand for more technology. The application of new technologies requires
changes in the law at different levels. Policy makers have to rely on threat assessments

1 See: (http://irissproiect.eu/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/Surveillance-fighting-crime-and-
violence-report-D1.1-IRISS.pdf). See also Wright D., Kreissl R. (eds.): Surveillance in Europe
Routledge 2014, forthcoming

produced by Law Enforcement and Security Agencies and there is almost no
independent evidence available demonstrating the effectiveness of surveillance or
weighing intended against unintended effects. Politicians are taken hostage by the
security-industrial complex, producing worst-case threat scenarios and offering socio-
technical solutions to prevent major incidents. It is far from clear though whether the
assessments are valid and whether the proposed solutions live up to the promises made
by providers.