September 15, 2014

Dear Members of Congress,

We, the undersigned civil liberties advocates, organizations, and whistleblowers, are
alarmed that Senator Leahy's recently introduced bill, the USA FREEDOM Act (S.

2685), legalizes currently illegal surveillance activities, grants immunity to corporations
that collaborate to violate privacy rights, reauthorizes the PATRIOT Act for an additional
2.5 years, and fails to reform EO 12333 or Section 702, other authorities used to collect
large amounts of information on Americans. For these reasons, we encourage both the
House and the Senate to oppose this legislation in its current form.

Governmental security agencies' zeal for collecting Americans' personal information
without regard for cost, efficacy, legality, or public support necessitates that Congress act
to protect the rights of residents across the United States and around the globe. Our
fundamental civil rights - the human rights we hold dear - are not adequately protected
by either the Senate or House versions of the USA FREEDOM Act.

The reckless actions of top officials charged with ensuring national security - from lying
to Congress to secretly weakening security standards to hacking the communications of
our allies - has undermined global confidence that the United States can act as an ethical
Internet steward. The 11th-hour gutting of the USA FREEDOM Act in the House of
Representatives and the CIA’s recent illegal spying on the U.S. Senate underscore just
how powerful and out of control this surveillance regime has become. Time and again,
these agencies have relied on aggressive manipulation of legal loopholes to thoroughly
undermine safeguards and checks and balances.

As just one example of why clarity in law is now necessary, the collection of information
on all domestic phone calls was justified under the “relevancy” standard in the PATRIOT
Act. The NSA claimed that all domestic telephone metadata records were “relevant” to
ongoing terrorism investigations and therefore legally collectible. This absurd
interpretation - that everyone's calls were relevant and no probable cause was needed -
was then rubber-stamped by a secret court in an ex parte hearing. Such secret law is
repugnant to the Fourth Amendment and the plain meaning of the legal authorities on
which the Intelligence Community has relied.

The USA FREEDOM Act (S. 2685) also contains ambiguities that are ripe for abuse:

•	The bill does not define "direct connection" in the new Call Detail Record
provision of Section 215. This may permit the government to access the
data from Americans' smart phones through telecommunication providers,
which the USA FREEDOM Act immunizes from customer lawsuits. This
would be an expansion of the NSA's current authority.

•	Loopholes in Section 215, such as the authority to collect phone records in
other than daily production or to use a corporation, organization, or

government entity as a specific selection term, still permit bulk data
collection, and the bill’s transparency provisions do not include production
under those loopholes in reporting requirements.1

•	The bill expands on the emergency provision approved by the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) in February, creating new powers
for the government to retain data and introduce it as evidence even if the
courts reject the NSA's petition to collect it.

S.	2685 fails to substantially rein in surveillance, and stops short of establishing adequate
oversight:

•	The bill does not safeguard against warrantless ("back door") searches on
the content of Americans' communications collected under Section 702.

•	The bill does not require reporting on the FBI's warrantless searches of
U.S. persons' content, even when there is no evidence of wrongdoing
against those people. Similarly, it does not require reporting on the
collection of things like credit card records or information about Western
Union transfers, among many other kinds of information, which would
allow the government to hide ongoing bulk collection of those items.

•	The bill does not prevent the use of Executive Order 12333 to conduct
bulk collection.2

S.	2685 fails to protect against future privacy invasions of innocent people. At a
minimum, meaningful privacy safeguards should:

•	Protect individuals from surveillance where they are not within two
degrees of direct communication with an individual subject to authorized
surveillance, and prohibit holding of information collected about innocent
people. These protections should be expressed as affirmative rights of
United States persons, not merely as a modification to a single law.

•	Prohibit the use of metadata for connection chaining where it represents
contact with companies or federal, state, or local governments. Because so
many people rely on these entities, such as Google or municipal
governments, contact chaining through them would collect substantial
amounts of information on most Americans.3

http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2014/07/30/might-get-fooled-again-the-

senate-and-surveillance/

2	http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/meet-executive-order-12333-the-reagan-rule-that-lets-
the-nsa-spy-on-americans/2014/07/18/93d2ac22-0b93-11e4-b8e5-d0de80767fc2_story.html

3	http://webpolicy. org/2013/12/09/metaphone-the-nsa-three-hop/

2

•	Prohibit the government from hacking into or otherwise interfering with
companies and other non-governmental organizations, and the people
whose information they hold, so long as they comply with warrants and
court orders.

•	Preserve the rights of Americans to pursue legal recourse against
companies where they fail to exercise reasonable care in protecting
individuals' information, including at the request of government actors not
acting pursuant to a legal warrant or court order. The bill currently gives
blanket immunity to companies responding to any government order, no
matter how outrageous.

•	Include efforts made by the U.S. House of Representatives, such as the
Lofgren-Massie Amendment and the Grayson amendments focused on
rehabilitating the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act.

•	Improve oversight by creating reporting processes and protections for
whistleblowers that disclose information to members of Congress.

•	Require more than summaries of the secret interpretations of law made by
government agencies and the FISC.

•	Not reauthorize the USA PATRIOT Act.

Congress must narrowly and unambiguously define the Intelligence Community's
surveillance authority. Sen. Leahy’s USA FREEDOM Act fails this basic test, and is not
the substantive reform originally envisioned and supported by the public.

Indeed, the USA FREEDOM Act has significant potential to degrade, rather than
improve, the surveillance status quo. At best, even if faithfully implemented, the current
bill will erect limited barriers to Section 215, only one of the various legal justifications
for surveillance, create additional loopholes, and provide a statutory framework for some
of the most problematic surveillance policies, all while reauthorizing the PATRIOT Act.
Given the several broad legal authorities claimed as justifications for mass surveillance of
United States persons and non-United States persons, it remains unclear if the Senate's
USA FREEDOM Act would end any of the Intelligence Community's clandestine
programs to surveil Americans.

For these reasons, we call on the House and the Senate to reject this version of the USA
FREEDOM Act. As long as S. 2685 contains ambiguous language that can be abused by
the Intelligence Community and lacks language that clearly protects innocent Americans,
we believe that focusing on USA PATRIOT Act reauthorization next year, remedies in

3

the courts, aggressive confirmation hearings for personnel, and defunding of Intelligence
Agencies are more constructive paths forward.

Sincerely,

Campaign for Liberty
CREDO Action
Emptywheel
Fight for the Future
Firedoglake
OffNow

Participatory Politics Foundation

Progressive Change Campaign Committee

Progressive Change Institute

Restore The Fourth

RootsAction.org

Tenth Amendment Center

The Rhode Island Coalition to Defend Human and Civil Rights

The Sunlight Foundation

ThoughtWorks

William Binney
Thomas Drake
Daniel Ellsberg
Mark Klein
Edward Loomis
Sascha Meinrath

J.	Kirk Wiebe

4