WASHINGTON
LEGISLATIVE OFFICE

AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION

WASHINGTON

LEGISLATIVE OFFICE

915 15th STREET, NW, 6TH

WASHINGTON, DC 20005

T/2 02 . 544.1681

F/2 02 .54 6.07 38

WWW.AC LU.ORG

LAURA W. MURPHY
DIRECTOR

NATIONAL OFFICE
125 BROAD STREET, 18TH F
NEW YORK, NY 10004-2400
T/212.549.2500

OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS

SUSAN N. HERMAN
PRESIDENT

ANTHONY D. ROMERO
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

ROBERT REMAR
TREASURER

May 7, 2014

The Honorable Bob Goodlatte
House Judiciary Committee
2138 Rayburn House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

The Honorable John Conyers
House Judiciary Committee
B351 Rayburn House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re:	With Discrete Amendments, ACLU Applauds Committee’s Vote

to End Bulk Collection and Move USA Freedom Act

Dear Chairman Goodlatte and Ranking Member Conyers:

While we request certain important improvements, we write in support of the
effort to end the bulk collection of Americans’ most personal information
through passage of H.R. 3361, the USA Freedom Act (“Uniting and
Strengthening America by Fulfilling Rights and Ending Eavesdropping,
Dragnet Collection, and Online Monitoring Act”).

The manager’s amendment as written does take important steps forward, but
we urge you to adopt these changes. The bill should:

•	Define “specific selection term” to guarantee that it will effectively
end bulk collection of Americans’ phone records;

•	Limit the circumstances in which the government can obtain records
more than one hop away from its target;

•	Ensure that judges in the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
have the authority to determine whether an application passes legal
muster;

•	Close the “back door” in the FISA Amendments Act; and

•	Include additional transparency provisions that will allow companies
who receive orders for the production of records under the law to
meaningfully inform Americans of the scope of such surveillance.

1

Last year, we discovered that the government has secretly been operating under a sweeping
interpretation of Section 215 of the USA Patriot Act, pursuant to which it has engaged in the
bulk collection of telephone “metadata”—including numbers dialed, date and time of call and
duration of conversation—for a substantial percentage of all calls in the United States. The same
legal theory could be deployed to justify the bulk collection of a vast array of other records.

The scope of this intelligence collection goes far beyond what many members of Congress, and
this Committee, believed it would when voting for the Patriot Act and subsequent amendments.
Contrary to the claims of some, this metadata is exceedingly sensitive, and can reveal intimate
details about our social, political, religious and private lives.

In its current form, the manager’s amendment would create a new authority for prospective
collection of call detail records in international terrorism investigations, but would require a
showing by the government in each case that the specific records sought pertain to a specific
investigation. Collection would be further limited to two “hops” out from the target, which is
consistent with the president’s reform proposal. If this new framework works correctly, the
government would no longer be able to engage in bulk collection of call detail records.

The bill would also prohibit bulk collection of other types of records under section 215 of the
Patriot Act; would place appropriate limits on the use of pen register and trap and trace devices,
which would prevent that separate authority from being used to engage in bulk collection; and
would place limits on the abuse of national security letter authorities. These are all welcome
changes that would provide meaningful new privacy and civil liberties protections.

The changes noted above, however, are crucial in ensuring that the bill does in fact achieve
meaningful reform. The term “specific selection term” must be defined to prevent what would
amount to bulk collection through the use of a broad term (such as a zip code). Additionally,
judges must be given express authority to determine whether an application for collection meets
the standard laid out in the bill; they must not return to being a mere rubber stamp.

The legislation should also reincorporate the limits in the original proposal that would prevent
the government from searching information collected under Section 702 of FISA for the
communications content of U.S. persons. Finally, the government must be subject to robust
reporting requirements, and companies that receive orders under the law must be allowed to
disclose the number of accounts affected by each respective surveillance authority.

We also continue to express concern that the lack of any meaningful constraint on searching call
detail records once placed in the NSA’s “corporate store” could undo the Committee’s reform
efforts today. Even at two “hops” a vast number of innocent Americans’ records will
nevertheless be collected by the NSA under the new call record authority. We strongly urge
Congress to also ensure that firm limits are placed on the NSA’s ability to access this immense
pool of data, as the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board unanimously recommended in
January. Congress should not allow the corporate store to serve as a back door into much of the
same sensitive information that this reform proposal sets out to protect.

2

To be clear, even if the Committee passes the manager’s amendment with our requested changes,
further reforms will be necessary to bring government surveillance authority in line with the
Constitution. That said, the manager’s amendment, with the changes described above, would
represent an important step forward.

We look forward to working with the committee and Congress as you consider these desperately
needed civil liberties protections, and we applaud the Committee’s initiative in finally moving
real reform to a vote.

Please do not hesitate to contact Legislative Counsel/Policy Advisor Gabe Rottman at 202-675-
2325 or grottman@aclu.org if you have any questions or comments.

Sincerely,

$Uota

Laura W. Murphy

Director, Washington Legislative Office

Gabriel Rottman

Legislative Counsel/Policy Advisor

3