EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS
COUR EUROPÉENNE DES DROITS DE L'HOMME

T : +33 (0)3 88 41 20 18
F : +33 (0)3 88 41 27 30
www.echr.coe. int

1 6 JAN 2014

By fax and post: +44 117 317 8093

Deighton Pierce Glynn
Centre Gate
Colston Avenue
UK-BRISTOL BS14TR

FOURTH SECTION

ECHR-LE4.1aR	9 January 2014

CO/hpi

Your ref: AH/2265/001/LCA
Application no. 58170/13

Big Brother Watch and Others v. the United Kingdom

Dear Sir,

I write to inform you that following a preliminary examination of the admissibility of the above
application on 7 January 2014, the Chamber to which the case has been allocated decided, under
Rule 54 § 2 (b) of the Rules of Court, that notice of the application should be given to the
Government of the United Kingdom and that the Government should be invited to submit written
observations on the admissibility and merits of the case.

Due to the voluminous nature of the supporting documents, you are requested to submit one
copy of each of the documents mentioned in your bundle index directly to the Agent for the
Government of the United Kingdom, Mr Derek Walton, Room WH MZ12, Foreign and
Commonwealth Office, King Charles Street, London SW1A 2AH.

You will find enclosed an information note to applicants on the proceedings after
communication of an application.

The Chamber further decided to give priority to the application under Rule 41.

The Government have been requested to submit their observations by 2 May 2014. These will
be sent to you in order that you may submit written observations in reply on behalf of the
applicants, together with any claim for just satisfaction under Article 41 (cf. Rule 60). Please do not
send any submissions before being asked to do so by the Court. Any unsolicited submissions will
normally not be included in the case file for consideration by the Court (Rule 38 § 1).

The Government have been requested to deal with the questions set out in the document
appended to this letter (Statement of facts prepared by the Registry of the Court and Questions to
the parties).

EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
67075 STRASBOURG CEDEX
FRANCE

COUNCIL Of EUROPE

CONSUL DE L'EUROPE

COUR EUROPÉENNE DES DROITS DE L’HOMME
CONSEIL DE L'EUROPE
67075 STRASBOURG CEDEX
FRANCE

-2-

The Government have also been requested to indicate by 2 May 2014 their position regarding
a friendly settlement of this case and to submit any proposals they may wish to make in this regard
(Rule 62). The same request will be made of you when you receive their observations.

I should draw your attention to Rule 33 of the Rules of Court, according to which documents
deposited with the Registry by the parties or by any third parties are to be accessible to the public,
unless the President of the Section decides otherwise for the reasons set out in Rule 33 § 2. It
follows that as a general rule any information contained in the documents which you lodge with the
Registry, including information about identified or identifiable persons, may be accessible to the
public. Moreover, such information may appear in the Court's HUDOC data base accessible via the
Internet if the Court includes it in a statement of facts prepared for notification of a case to the
respondent Government, a decision on admissibility or striking off, or a judgment.

Yours faithfully,

(/		
c	F. Araci /	
Deput	Section Registrar	

Enes: Statement of facts and Questions
Information note

EUROPEAN COURT OF HUM AN RIGHTS
COUR EUROPÉENNE DES DROITS DE L'HOMME

Communicated on 9 January 2014

FOURTH SECTION

Application no. 58170/13
BIG BROTHER WATCH and others
against the United Kingdom
lodged on 4 September 2013

STATEMENT OF FACTS

A. The circumstances of the case

The facts of the case, as submitted by the applicants, may be summarised
as follows.

I.	The applicants

Big Brother Watch (the first applicant) is a limited company based in
London which operates as a campaign group to conduct research into, and
challenge policies which threaten privacy, freedoms and civil liberties, and
to expose the scale of surveillance by the State. Its staff members regularly
liaise and work in partnership with similar organisations in other countries,
communicating by email and Skype. As a vocal critic of excessive
surveillance, and a commentator on sensitive topics relating to national
security, the first applicant believes that its staff and directors may have
been the subject of surveillance by or on behalf of the United Kingdom
Government. Moreover, it has contact with internet freedom campaigners
and those who wish to complain to regulators around the world, so it is
conscious that some of those with whom it is in contact may also fall under
surveillance.

English PEN (the second applicant) is a registered charity, based in
London but with 145 affiliated centres in over 100 countries. It promotes
freedom to write and read, and campaigns around the world on freedom of
expression, and equal access to the media and works closely with individual
writers at risk and in prison. Most of its internal and external
communications are by email and by Skype. Since many of those for and
whom with English PEN campaigns express views on governments which
may be controversial, English PEN believes that it. and those with whom it

COUNCIL OF EUROPE

CONSEIL DE LEUROPE

2

BIG BROTHER WA ICH AND OTHERS v. THE UNITED KINGDOM -

STATEMENT OF FACTS AND QUESTIONS

communicates, may be the subject of United Kingdom Government
surveillance, or may be the subject of surveillance by other countries’
security services which may pass such information to the United Kingdom
security services (and vice-versa).

Open Rights Group (the third applicant) is a limited company, based in
London, which operates as a campaign organisation, defending freedom of
expression, innovation, creativity and consumer rights on the internet. It
regularly liaises and works in partnership with other organisations in other
countries. It is a member organisation of European Digital Rights, a network
of 35 privacy and civil rights organisations founded in June 2002, with
offices in 21 different countries in Europe. Most of its internal and external
communications are by email and Skype. For similar reasons to those
expressed by the first and second applicants, it believes that its electronic
communications and activities may be subject to foreign intercept conveyed
to United Kingdom authorities, or intercept activity by United Kingdom
authorities.

Dr Constanze Kurz (the fourth applicant) is an expert on surveillance
techniques, based in Berlin, where she works at the University of Applied
Sciences. From 2010 to 2013, she was a member of the Internet and Digital
Society Commission of Inquiry of the German Bundestag. She is also
spokeswoman of the German “Computer Chaos Club” (CCC), which
campaigns to highlight weaknesses in computer networks which risk
endangering the interests of the public, occasionally through direct action.
Dr Kurz has been outspoken in relation to the recent disclosures regarding
United Kingdom internet surveillance activities, which continue to be a
subject of significant concern in the German media. She fears that she may
well have been the subject of surveillance either directly by the United
Kingdom or by foreign security services who may have passed that data to
the United Kingdom security services, not only because of her activities as a
freedom of expression campaigner and hacking activist, but also because
these security services may wish to learn from her and persons with whom
she communicates, habitually in encrypted communications.

2.	The surveillance programmes complained about

The applicants concern was triggered by media coverage following the
leak of information by Edward Snowden, a former systems administrator
with the United States National Security Agency (NSA). According to
media reports, the NSA has in place a programme, known as PRISM, which
allows it to access a wide range of internet communication content (such as
emails, chat, video, images, documents, links and other files) and metadata
(information permitting the identification and location of internet users),
from United States corporations, including some of the largest internet
service providers such as Microsoft, Google, Yahoo, Apple, Facebook,
YouTube and Skype. Since global internet data takes the cheapest, rather
than the most direct route, a substantial amount of global data passes
through the servers of these American companies, including possibly emails
sent by the applicants in London and Berlin to their international contacts.
The applicants submit that the NSA also operates a second interception
programme known as UPSTREAM, which provides access to nearly all the
traffic passing through fibre optic cables owned by United States

BIG BROTHER WAICH AND OTHERS v. HIE UNITED KINGDOM -

STATEMENT OF FACTS AND QUESTIONS

3

communication service providers such as AT&T and Verizon. Together,
these programmes provide very broad access to the communications content
and metadata of non-United States persons, to whom the provisions of the
Fourth Amendment (the United States Constitutional privacy guarantee),
and allow for this material to be collected, stored and searched using
keywords. According to the documents leaked by Fdward Snowden, the
United Kingdom Government Communications Head Quarters (GCHQ) has
had access to PRISM material since at least June 2010 and has used it to
generate intelligence reports (197 reports in 2012).

In addition, the disclosures based on Edward Snowdeivs leaked
documentation have included details about a United Kingdom surveillance
programme called TEMPORA. According to the applicants, TEMPORA is
a means by which GCIIQ can access electronic traffic passing along fibre-
optic cables running between the United Kingdom and North America. The
data collected include both internet and telephone communications. GCHQ
is able to access not only metadata but also the content of emails, Faccbook
entries and website histories. The TEMPORA programme is authorised by
certificates issued under section 8(4) of the Regulation of Investigatory
Powers Act 2000 (RIPA: see below). The applicants allege that United
States agencies have been given extensive access to TEMPORA
information.

B. Relevant domestic law

Section 1 of the Intelligence Services Act 1994 (“ISA”) (see Annex 4)
provides a statutory basis for the operation of the United Kingdom's Secret
Intelligence Service:

“1. The Secret Intelligence Service.

(1)	There shall continue to be a Secret Intelligence Service (in this Act referred to as
'the Intelligence Service') under the authority of the Secretary of State; and, subject to
subsection (2) below, its functions shall be -

(a)	to obtain and provide information relating to the actions or intentions of persons
outside the British Islands; and

(b)	to perform other tasks relating to the actions or intentions of such persons.

(2)	The functions of the Intelligence Service shall be exercisable only-

(a)	in the interests of national security, with particular reference to the defence and
foreign policies of Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom; or

(b)	in the interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom; or

(c)	in support of the prevention or detection of serious crime.”

Section 2 of ISA provides for the control of the operations of the
Intelligence Service by a Chief of Service, to be appointed by the Secretary
of State. Under section 2(2)(a), the Chiefs duties include ensuring:

“that there are arrangements for securing that no information is obtained by the
Intelligence Service except so far as necessary for the proper discharge of its functions
and that no information is disclosed by it except so far as necessary -

(i)	for that purpose;

(ii)	in the interests of national security;

4	BIG BROTHER WATCII AND Oil IERS v. THE UNI TED KINGDOM -

S TATEMENT OE FACTS AND QUESTIONS

(Hi) for the purposes of the prevention or detection of serious crime; or
(iv) for the purpose of any criminal proceedings.”

Section 3 of ISA sets out the authority for the operation of GCHQ:

“3. The Government Communications Headquarters.

(I) the shall continue to be a Government Communications Headquarters under the
authority of the Secretary of State; and, subject to subsection (2) below, its functions
shall be

(a)	to monitor or interfere with electromagnetic, acoustic and other emissions and
any equipment producing such emissions and to obtain and provide information
derived from or related to such emissions or equipment and from encrypted material;

(2)	The functions referred to in subsection 1(a) above shall be exercisable only -

(a)	in the interests of national security, with particular reference to the defence and
foreign policies of Her Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom; or

(b)	in the interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom in relation to
the actions or intentions of persons outside the British Islands; or

(c)	in support of the prevention or detection of serious crime.”

The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (RIPA) came into
force on 15 December 2000. The explanatory memorandum described the
main purpose of the Act as being to ensure that the relevant investigatory
powers were used in accordance with human rights.

Section 1(1) of RIPA makes it an offence for a person intentionally and
without lawful authority to intercept, at any place in the United Kingdom,
any communication in the course of its transmission by means of a public
postal service or a public telecommunication system.

Section 8(4) and (5) allows the Secretary of State to issue a warrant for
“the interception of external communications in the course of their
transmission by means of a telecommunication system*’. At the time of
issuing such a warrant, she must also issue a certificate setting out a
description of the intercepted material which she considers it necessary to
be examined, and staling that the warrant is necessary, inter alia, in the
interests of national security, for the purpose of preventing or detecting
serious crime or for the purpose of safeguarding the economic well-being of
the United Kingdom and that the conduct authorised by the warrant is
proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by that conduct.

RIPA sets out a number of general safeguards in section 15:

“15. General safeguards

(1)	Subject to subsection (6), it shall be the duty of the Secretary of State to ensure,
in relation to all interception warrants, that such arrangements are in force as lie
considers necessary for securing -

(a)	that the requirements of subsections (2) and (3) are satisfied in relation to the
intercepted material and any related communications data; and

(b)	in the case of warrants in relation to which there are section 8(4) certilicates, that
the requirements of section 16 are also satisfied.

(2)	The requirements of this subsection are satisfied in relation to the intercepted
material and any related communications data if each of the following -

(a) the number of persons to whom any of the material or data is disclosed or
otherwise made available.

BIG BROTHER WATCH AND OTHERS v. HIE UNITED KINGDOM

STATEMENT OF FACT'S AND QUEST IONS

5

(b)	the extent to which any of the material or data is disclosed or otherwise made
available,

(c)	the extent to which any of the material or data is copied, and

(d)	the number of copies that arc made,

is limited to the minimum that is necessary for the authorised purposes.

(3)	The requirements of this subsection are satisfied in relation to the intercepted
material and any related communications data if each copy made of any of the
material or data (if not destroyed earlier) is destroyed as soon as there are no longer
any grounds for retaining it as necessary for any of the authorised purposes.

(4)	For the purposes of this section something is necessary for the authorised
purposes if, and only if -

(a)	it continues to be, or is likely to become, necessary as mentioned in section 5(3);

(b)	it is necessary for facilitating the carrying out of any of the functions under this
Chapter of the Secretary of State;

(c)	it is necessary for facilitating the carrying out of any functions in relation to this
Part of the Interception of Communications Commissioner or of the Tribunal;

(d)	it is necessary to ensure that a person conducting a criminal prosecution has the
information he needs to determine what is required of him by his duty to secure the
fairness of the prosecution; or

(e)	it is necessary for the performance of any duty imposed on any person by the
Public Records Act 1958 or the Public Records Act (Northern Ireland) 1923.

(5)	The arrangements for the time being in force under this section for securing that
the requirements of subsection (2) are satisfied in relation to the intercepted material
or any related communications data must include such arrangements as the Secretary
of State considers necessary for securing that every copy of the material or data that is
made is stored, for so long as it is retained, in a secure manner.

(6)	Arrangements in relation to interception warrants which are made for the
purposes of subsection ( 1 ) -

(a)	shall not be required to secure that the requirements of subsections (2) and (3)
are satisfied in so far as they relate to any of the intercepted material or related
communications data, or any copy of any such material or data, possession of which
has been surrendered to any authorities of a country or territory outside the
United Kingdom; but

(b)	shall be required to secure, in the case of every such warrant, that possession of
the intercepted material and data and of copies of the material or data is surrendered to
authorities of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom only if the
requirements of subsection (7) are satisfied.

(7)	T he requirements of this subsection are satisfied in the case of a warrant if it
appears to the Secretary of State -

(a)	that requirements corresponding to those of subsections (2) and (3) will apply, to
such extent (if any) as the Secretary of State thinks fit, in relation to any of the
intercepted material or related communications data possession of which, or of any
copy of which, is surrendered to the authorities in question; and

(b)	that restrictions arc in force which would prevent, to such extent (if any) as the
Secretary of State thinks fit, the doing of anything in, for the purposes of or in
connection with any proceedings outside the United Kingdom which would result in
such a disclosure as, by virtue of section 17, could not be made in the
United Kingdom.

(8) In this section ‘copy’, in relation to intercepted material or related
communications data, means any of the following (whether or not in documentary
form) -

6

BIG BRO THER WATCH AND OTHERS v. THE UNITED KINGDOM

STATEMENT OF FACTS AND QUES TIONS

(a)	any copy, extract or summary of the material or data which identifies itself as the
product of an interception, and

(b)	any record referring to an interception which is a record of the identities of the
persons to or by whom the intercepted material was sent, or to whom the
communications data relates,

and ‘copied’ shall be construed accordingly.”

Section 16 sets out additional safeguards in relation to interception of
“external” communications under certificated warrants:

“16. Extra safeguards in the case of certificated warrants.

(1)	For the purposes of section 15 the requirements of this section, in the case of a
warrant in relation to which there is a section 8(4) certificate, are that the intercepted
material is read, looked at or listened to by the persons to whom it becomes available
by virtue of the warrant to the extent only that it -

(a)	has been certified as material the examination of which is necessary as
mentioned in section 5(3)(a), (b) or (c); and

(b)	falls within subsection (2).

(2)	Subject to subsections (3) and (4), intercepted material falls within this
subsection so far only as it is selected to be read, looked at or listened to otherwise
than according to a factor which -

(a)	is referable to an individual who is known to be for the time being in the British
Islands; and

(b)	has as its purpose, or one of its purposes, the identification of material contained
in communications sent by him, or intended for him.

(3)	Intercepted material falls within subsection (2), notwithstanding that it is
selected by reference to any such factor as is mentioned in paragraph (a) and (b) of
that subsection, if-

(a)	it is certified by the Secretary of State for the purposes of section 8(4) that the
examination of material selected according to factors referable to the individual in
question is necessary as mentioned in subsection 5(3)(a), (b) or (c); and

(b)	the material relates only to communications sent during a period specified in the
certificate that is no longer than the permitted maximum.

(3A) In subsection (3)(b) ‘the permitted maximum’ means

(a)	in the case of material the examination of which is certified for the purposes of
section 8(4) as necessary in the interests of national security, six months; and

(b)	in any other case, three months.

F2(4) Intercepted material also falls within subsection (2), notwithstanding that it is
selected by reference to any such factor as is mentioned in paragraph (a) and (b) of
that subsection, if -

(a)	the person to whom the warrant is addressed believes, on reasonable grounds,
that the circumstances are such that the material would fall within that subsection; or

(b)	the conditions set out in subsection (5) below are satisfied in relation to the
selection of the material.

(5) Those conditions are satisfied in relation to the selection of intercepted material
if-

(a) it has appeared to the person to whom the warrant is addressed that there has
been such a relevant change of circumstances as, but for subsection (4)(b), would
prevent the intercepted material from falling within subsection (2);

BIG BROTHER WATCH AND OTHERS v. THE UNITED KINGDOM -	7

STATEMENT OF FACTS AND QUESTIONS

(b)	since it first so appeared, a written authorisation to read, look at or listen to the
material has been given by a senior official; and

(c)	the selection is made before the end of the permitted period.

(5A) In subsection (5)(c) ‘the permitted period’ means -

(a)	in the case of material the examination of which is certified for the purposes of
section 8(4) as necessary in the interests of national security, the period ending with
the end of the fifth working day after it first appeared as mentioned in subsection
(5)(a) to the person to whom the warrant is addressed; and

(b)	in any other case, the period ending with the end of the first working day after it
first so appeared to that person.

(6)References in this section to its appearing that there has been a relevant change of
circumstances are references to its appearing either -

(a)	that the individual in question has entered the British Islands; or

(b)	that a belief by the person to whom the warrant is addressed in the individual’s
presence outside the British Islands was in fact mistaken.”

Part IV of RIPA provides for the appointment of an Interception of
Communications Commissioner and an Intelligence Services
Commissioner, charged with supervising the activities of the intelligence
services.

Section 65 of RIPA provides for a Tribunal, the Investigatory Powers
Tribunal, which has jurisdiction to determine claims related to the conduct
of the intelligence services, including proceedings under the Human Rights
Act 1998.

Section 71 of RIPA requires the Secretary of State to issue Codes of
Practice relating to the exercise and performance of the powers and duties
under the Act. One such Code issued under section 71 of RIPA, the
“Acquisition and Disclosure of Communications Data: Code of Practice”,
provides, in relation to the provision of data to foreign agencies:

“Acquisition of communication data on behalf of overseas authorities

7.11	Whilst the majority of public authorities which obtain communications data
under the Act have no need to disclose that data to any authority outside the United
Kingdom, there can be occasions when it is necessary, appropriate and lawful to do so
in matters of international co-operation.

7.12	There are two methods by which communications data, whether obtained under
the Act or not, can be acquired and disclosed to overseas public authorities:

Judicial co-operation

Non-judicial co-operation

Neither method compels United Kingdom public authorities to disclose data to
overseas authorities. Data can only be disclosed when a United Kingdom public
authority is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so and all relevant conditions
imposed by domestic legislation have been fulfilled.

Non-judicial co-operation

7.15	Public authorities in the United Kingdom can receive direct requests for
assistance from their counterparts in other countries. These can include requests for
the acquisition and disclosure of communications data for the purpose of preventing
or detecting crime. On receipt of such a request the United Kingdom public authority
may consider seeking the acquisition or disclosure of the requested data under the
provisions of Chapter II of Part I of the Act.

8

BIO BROTHER WATCH AND OTI IliRS v. Tl IE UNITED KINGDOM -

STATEMENT OE [ ACTS AND QUESTIONS

7.16	The United Kingdom public authority must be satisfied that the request
complies with United Kingdom obligations under human rights legislation. The
necessity and proportionality of each case must be considered before the authority
processes the authorisation or notice.

Disclosure of communications data to overseas authorities

7.17	Where a United Kingdom public authority is considering the acquisition of
communications data on behalf of an overseas authority and transferring the data to
that authority it must consider whether the data will be adequately protected outside
the United Kingdom and what safeguards may be needed to ensure that. Such
safeguards might include attaching conditions to the processing, storage and
destruction of the data.

7.21 The [Data Protection ActJ recognises that it will not always be possible to
ensure adequate data protection in countries outside of the European Union and the
European Economic Area, and there arc exemptions to the principle, for example if
the transfer of data is necessary for reasons of ‘substantial public interest’. There may
be circumstances when it is necessary, for example in the interests of national
security, for communications data to be disclosed to a third party country, even
though that country does not have adequate safeguards in place to protect the data.
That is a decision that can only be taken by the public authority holding the data on a
case by case basis."

COMPLAINTS

The applicants allege that they arc likely to have been the subject of
generic surveillance by GCHQ and/or that the United Kingdom security
services may have been in receipt of foreign intercept material relating to
their electronic communications, such as to give rise to interferences with
their rights under Article 8 of the Convention. They contend that these
interferences are not "in accordance with the law", for the following
reasons.

In the applicants' submission, there is no basis in domestic law for the
receipt of information from foreign intelligence agencies. In addition, there
is an absence of legislative control and safeguards in relation to the
circumstances in which the United Kingdom intelligence services can
request foreign intelligence agencies to intercept communications and/or to
give the United Kingdom access to stored data that has been obtained by
interception, and the extent to which the United Kingdom intelligence
services can use, analyse, disseminate and store data solicited and/or
received from foreign intelligence agencies and the process by which such
data must be destroyed.

In relation to the interception of communications directly by GCHQ. the
applicants submit that the statutory regime applying to external
communications warrants docs not comply with the minimum standards
outlined by the Court in its case-law, in particular Weber and Saravia
v. Germany (dec.), no. 54934/00, §§ 92-95, ECHR 2006-XI. They contend
that section 8(4) of RIPA permits the blanket strategic monitoring of
communications where at least one party is outside the British Isles, under
broadly defined warrants, which are continuously renewed so as to form a
"rolling programme”. Although the Secretary of State is required to issue a

HIG BRO I'11ER WATCH AND O i l IFRS v. THE UNITED KINGDOM	9

STATEMENT OF FACTS AND QUESTIONS

certificate limiting the extent to which the intercepted material can be
examined, the legislation also permits such certificates to be framed in very
broad terms, for example, “in the interests of national security”. The
applicants claim, in particular, that the concept of “national security” in this
context is vague and unforeseeable in scope. They consider that the
safeguards set out in sections 15 and 16 of R1PA are of limited scope,
particularly in the light of the broad definition of national security
employed. They further contend that domestic law docs not provide for
effective independent authorisation and oversight.

The applicants further contend that the generic interception of external
communications by GCHQ. merely on the basis that such communications
have been transmitted by transatlantic fibre-optic cables, is an inherently
disproportionate interference with the private lives of thousands, perhaps
millions, of people.

K)

BIG BROTHER WA TCH AND OTHERS v. THE UNITED KINGDOM -

STATEMENT OE TACTS AND QUESTIONS

QUESTIONS TO THE PARTIES

1.	Can the applicants claim to be victims of violations of their rights under
Article 8?

2.	Have the applicants done all that is required of them to exhaust domestic
remedies? In particular, (a) had the applicants raised their Convention
complaints before the Investigatory Powers Tribunal, could the Tribunal
have made a declaration of incompatibility under section 4 of the Human
Rights Act 1998; and, if so, (b) has the practice of giving effect to the
national courts’ declarations of incompatibility by amendment of legislation
become sufficiently certain that the remedy under Section 4 of the
Human Rights Act 1998 should be regarded by the Court as an effective
remedy which should be exhausted before bringing a complaint of this type
before the Court (see Burden v. the United Kingdom [GC], no. 13378/05,
§§ 43-44, ECHR2008)?

3.	In the event that the application is not inadmissible on grounds of
non-exhaustion of domestic remedies, are the acts of the United Kingdom
intelligence services in relation to:

(a)	the soliciting, receipt, search, analysis, dissemination, storage and
destruction of interception data obtained by the intelligence services of
other States; and/or

(b)	their own interception, search, analysis, dissemination, storage
and destruction of data relating to “external'’ communications (where at
least one party is outside the British Isles);

“in accordance with the law’" and “necessary in a democratic society” within
the meaning of Article 8 of the Convention, with reference to the principles
set out in Weber and Saravia v. Germany (dec.), no. 54934/00,
ECHR2006-XI; Liberty and Others v. the United Kingdom, no. 58243/00.
1 July 2008 and Iordachi and Others v. Moldova, no. 25198/02,
10 February 2009?