Internationale

für Menschenrechte

Im Geiste Carl von Ossietzkys

1914 — 2014 - ioo Jahre Einsatzfür Menschenrechte

Press release, 14 October 2014

The International League for Human Rights awards
the 2014 Carl von Ossietzky Medal
to whistleblower Edward Snowden and journalists
Laura Poitras and Glenn Greenwald
The medal will be awarded at Urania in Berlin, Sunday 14 December 2014 at 11am

To celebrate its 100th anniversary, the Internationale Liga für Menschenrechte (International league for
Human Rights) jury has decided to award the 2014 Carl von Ossietzky medal to:

-	Former NSA contractor and whistleblower Edward Snowden (currently in Russia)

-	Documentary filmmaker Laura Poitras (currently in Germany), and

-	Journalist and lawyer Glenn Greenwald (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil).

Edward Snowden's historic revelations exposed the world’s most widespread surveillance system, which was
implemented without raising any initial suspicions. Snowden shares the medal with Laura Poitras and Glenn
Greenwald, whom he entrusted with publishing his discoveries. Thanks to their involvement, Snowden’s rev-
elations were made public around the world. Global awareness of the full extent of human rights violations
connected with international mass surveillance by secret services is therefore thanks to the whistleblower
Snowden and the two people who transmitted this information, Poitras and Greenwald.

The three award-winners have shown great courage with this groundbreaking work. Despite resistance and
predictable threats to their physical integrity and individual freedom, they chose to inform the public about the
practices of secret services in the United States of America and other countries breaching international law
and human rights. Like Carl von Ossietzky, they helped democratic transparency triumph. In taking a stand,
they have done a great service for democracy and human rights in this digital era. For this reason, the Interna-
tional League for Human Rights is awarding them this medal in the name of Carl von Ossietzky, the commit-
ted and courageous journalist who worked during the years of the Weimar Republic.

In parallel, the League demands wide-ranging protection against political and criminal proceedings for whis-
tleblowers, as established by human rights and international law. It demands that Snowden be granted asylum
in the Federal Republic of Germany, and that he be given free and safe passage to testify as an expert witness
before the Federal Parliament commission of inquiry into NSA, and as a prosecution witness in proceedings
that the League and other parties have been trying to file against the federal government and secret service
agencies for months.

Since 1962, the League has awarded the Carl von Ossietzky medal to people or groups who stand out for their
exceptional courage and commitment to the realisation, defence and expansion of fundamental and human
rights and peace. Up until 2010, the medal was awarded every year. Since then, it has been awarded at least
once every two years.

The 2012 medal was awarded to director Peter Lilienthal.

Haus. der Demokratie und Menschenrechte, Greifswalder Str. 4, 10405 Berlin,
Tel. +49 30 396 21 22 | Fax +49 30 396 21 47 | vorstand@ilmr.de | www.ilmr.de

Bankverbindung: Bank für Sozialwirtschaft, Konto: 331 71 00, Bankleitzahl: 100 205 00