 The EEG -- NSA's Newest Center

SIGINT Director
Run Dates;DEf1Df2D11,D5f13f2D11

On 9 May, NSA established the European Cente
front Twhat Twas formerly the European Security Operations
Center The EEG Twill fail organizationally under NSAICSS

 

loft}

Europe and Africa This is more thanjust a name
change; it is furthering the commitment ofthe National Security
Agency to a long-term mission presence in Germany. The name and
accompanying organizational change re?ect a recognition ofthe
broader mission being supported from the ECC, as well as the strengthening ofthe
analytic mission at the center.

 

In addition to the well-established SIGINT analytic and collection
management missions, there is now an NSAICSS Threat Operations Center 
and IT component to the center. ECC's enhanced analytic mission is a welcome
deyelopment. The organization is a critical enterprise partner in the CT Africa, and
Middle East missions.

Since its beginnings in EDD-4 as the European Security Center the
ECC has been a success story in terms mission accomplishments and
growth. In the last four years alone, the ECC's Analysis and Production mission set
has increased from to 26 distinct assigned missions, becoming the largest
Analysis and Production actiyity in Europe. Complementing this rapid mission
expansion has been an increased collaboratiye effort with foreign partners, with
multiple IC members, and across the SIGINT Enterprise.

The quality and significance ofECC's SIGINT accomplishments speak for
themselyes. In the last month alone, ECC was a key contributor to the arrests of
two key terrorist personalities, underscoring its refined collaboratiye enyironment.
Dyerall, ECC products are included in the President's Daily on ayerage
twice a week. Further, for the second time in as many years, the ECC recently
receiyed an Honorable Mention citation in competition for the prestigious Trayis
Trophy award.

Located in Darmstadt, Germany, the ECC currently has a total of24D
personnel, a diyerse mi): ofmilitary seryice members, Department of the Army
ciyilians, NSA ciyilians, and contractors. The ECC has responded to new
intelligence priorities generated by the standup and has assumed
new TCIPI responsibilities in both the US European Command and US
Africa Command areas of responsibility.

Please join us in congratulating the ECC and its outstanding workforce
on their accomplishments and welcoming them as NSA's newest center.

 

View ofthe 

 

 

 

 

Eof'j

SofS

