(U//FOUO) A Little Bad Aibling Nostalgia

FROM: Some DA Veterans
Unknown

Run Date: 06/04/2004

(U//FOUO) Once the closure of Bad Aibling Station (located in southern Bavaria in
Germany) became official with DIRaram-312 announcing the cessation of mission,
we thought it appropriate to give those lucky enough to have been stationed there

1 of 3

a chance to reminisce!?!

(U) You know you are a DA veteran if...

...driving eight hours to buy pottery is a day well spent.

...you get excited to see a "new release" that has been out in the States for almost a
year.

...dreaming of honey wagons is anything but sweet.

...mixing lemon-lime soda with beer doesn't always seem like a bad idea.

...you have seen 10,000 people do the Macarena in a tent.

...you know that UPPER Bavaria is SOUTH of LOWER Bavaria.

...you've seen Neuschwanstein or the Glockenspiel in Munich 53 times, and never
because YOU wanted to go.

...you've been to "town hall" meetings at which a final decision to close the site was
announced in three different years.

...you attended both the final closing and re-opening of the AFRO facilities at
Chiemsee.

...Derek the car registration guy has called you "mate".

...you bought a sea-van's worth of Windex, "just because it was in stock today".

...you have spent $200 worth of time to get $40 worth of Italian gas coupons.

...while dining, you consistently chose beer as your beverage because it was half
the price of Coke!

...you missed a day of mission work to verify the slot machine take at the club.
...you've concluded that, as a general rule in restaurants, German dogs behave
better than some American patrons.

...your windshield still has an Austrian Autobahn Toll Vignette on it.

...driving on the Autobahn at 120 mph seems far safer than traveling the
Washington Beltway.

...you know that leberkaese is made neither of liver, nor cheese.

...you welcomed biergarten season because a non-smoking restaurant was never an
option.

...you swapped free biers for free pizza at the 4th of July fest.

...you understand why perfectly normal people bang tiny bottles of schnapps on a
fest table before drinking them.

...you purchased window screens and Velcro tape in order to keep mosguitoes from
invading your house.

...you had a map of every ESSO gas station in Germany and planned your trips
accordingly.

...you understood why you needed to have someone guard your vehicle when you
went pottery shopping in Poland.

...you packed out to return to the States, but bought more stuff and had to ship it
home with a friend who was leaving after you.

...you sought out the person with the schedule for working the beer booth at the
4th of July fest.

...you were a recipient of a "free bier at the club" email.

2 of 3

3 of 3