 NBA Ennununjcatinns Huh in Eurnpe Is Mndernjzed

FROM: 
Directcr, Enrcpean Technical Center 
Run Date: IDIEDIEDII

 

The Enrcpean Technical Center in Wieahaclen,
Germany, is primary ccnimnnicaticna huh in that part cfthe wcricl, previcling
canininnicaticna ccnnectivity, SIGINT cciiecticn, and data-?aw services tn NSAera,

laf'j

wari'lghters and i'nreign partners in Eurnpe, Africa and the Middle East. That's why
it is essential that ETC's capabilities keep up with the 

 

Cin 19 September, NSA n?icials? prnudly hnsted a ribbnn-cutting
ceremnny tn n?icially mark the nf CDDLIKELESIDN -- ETC's
Cnmmunicatinns Center mndernisatinn prnject. The prnject initially began as a
limited ei?l'nrt tn address challenges in cnnling, equipment cnn?guratinn, cable
management, and space in the rnnm. Over time the ei?l'nrt grew intn a much
brnaderjnint prnject tn rebuild the i'rnm the grnund up intn a
state-nilthe-art cnmmunicatinns center.

 

ETC ribbnn cutting

 

 

 

Many years nfhigh nperatinns temps and expansinn had resulted in
rack cnn?guratinns, air?nw, insuf?cient rack size, installatinn
substandard safety and security measures, cable
management, and lackluster dncumentatinn. In early ever 15D pnwer
supplies failed nver several spurring an agreement between NSF-Us 
Directnrate and ETC leadership tn expand the scnpe cf the
CDDLIKELESIDN prnject tn include a new pnwer infrastructure.

The CDDLIKELESIDN prnject was in seven phases, all withnut
any interruptinn tn the missinn data flnwing thrnugh ETC. alternated
between Enterprise IT Services and elements tn replace legacy 
and equipment racks; clnse partnering amnng the nrganisatinns allnwed i'nr timely
nfthe varinus phased tasks. As an example, all equipment 
cnmmunicatinns far 2? Third Party partner was mnved, re-installed and
dncumented within 12 days.

The by included new Uninterrupted iner Supply
UPS distributinn system, grnunding system, raised access rack pnwer
distributinn elements and cnmputer air-ccnditinner units and

Enf'j

condensation piping. ETC partnered with T32 personnel to remove SI legacy racks,
install SS new equipment racks, move 253 pieces of equipment, install 5,553 feet of
new ?ber, and create LETS pages of documentation. The new racks represent a
STUCK: increase in available equipment space with cooling capacity doubled from
BEDS conditions. The newly out?tted space will provide reliable and robust IT
communications, and data-transport services for the foreseeable future.

 

Notes:

Hosting the event were Director of the Euro

Technical Center, together with . Chief. 
Director, Technology Directorate- Mr. Assistant Deputy
Director for Data Acquisition; and Chief, Installations and

Facilities Services.

   
  
 

  

Sof'j

