TUP SEE (ll: URN

(U) Topic

(SHELL TD USA, DELI) Countetten?orism (CT) Relationship with the Getman
Federal Intelligence Service (END) and the Getman Federal Df?ce for the Protection of
the Constitution 

(U) Potential Landmittes

(TSHS The Getmans may bring up the subject of SKYPE. response
has been that it has had some success working SKYPE via tailored access at the
end point by gaining access to one or more of the computers involved in the
session. When l-ir. Klaus-Fritsche (State Sectetaty, Germany I'vlinistty of Inte1ior)
sought assistance with inte1cepting SKYPE transmissions during a ll]
January 2012 meeting with DIRNSA, DIRNSA suggested the DN1 Reptesentative
Berlin take the lead in an?anging an exchange to include CIA, FBI and NBA.
Should the pattner raise this issue again, recommend that NSA once again
redirects them to FBI and CIA.

(SIENF) The Getmans have pteviously apptoached NSA about using information
detived ftom SIGINT in open courL CT is concerned that exposing SIG INT
capabilities in Getman coutt threatens the ability to maintain the desired and
planned for level of SIGINT coopetation.

(U) Talking Points

(U) Director?s Talking Points

(SHELL TD USA, DELI) Ensure that the Germans undetstand the intpottance that
NSA places on its robust CT shating telationship with the END and the Ef'v', as
well as desire to continue to move fotward in the ongoing analytic and
technical exchanges.

(SHELL TD USA, DELI) Acknowledge that now has a fotmal
relationship with the Ef"vr (apptoved 20 Match 2013). CT expects to receive value
ftom a closer pattnership because it will genetate a gteater
syne1gy to mote effectively counter tertotist threats. CT is pleased that END is
taking a leadetship role in implementing technical solutions when pattneting with
the Ef'v', and we expect this to continue.

(U) SIGLNT Director?s Talking Points

TD USA, DELI) Discuss and emphasize commitment to
continuing and increasing the exchange on discover methodologies. The topic

[Ilassified Ey-
Den'ved From: 1-52
Dated: 
Declassify (in: 

TUP SEE (ll: URN

if]? SEE: HE 

and impoltance of using behavior detection techniques to identify unltnown
extremists was discussed several times in 2012 with both END and Ef?v? and 
sees great value in working closely with both German partners on these analytic
tradecraft methodologies. The next meeting to further discuss behavior detection
is scheduled for 10-11 April in Bad Aibling with the END and Ef?v'. These
sessions are specifically focused on understanding. creating. and implementing
discovery capabilities through Ultimately. goal is to gain
benefit by collaborating on Cielman extremists talgets once the Ef'v' has. and is
timally usin . 

 

(U) Background

TD USA. F?v?E?f} collaborates with the END (bilaterally and
multilaterally) and with the Ef?v? (bilaterally) on avaliety of issues and targets.
Engagement in the multilateral realm is via the Seniors Eulope (SSEUR) 
coalition NSA exchanges infolmation with the END and the Ef?v? on the
following topics:

 

TD USA. F?v?E?f} also provides information to the END on the following
topics:

 

if]? SEE: HE 

SEC 

TD USA. F?v?E?f} The primary stakeholders for CT exchanges with the
Gelmans ate the European Center (ECC) and the S21 Deployed Analyst (DA
in Berlin. CT meets with the END and Ef?v' qualterly and with the END ever
six months at The latest analytic exchange was on 4-5 December 2012 in
Berlin. Although plevious discussions focused on extremists traveling to Germany and
Central Asia. this latest exchange focused heavily on North African CT topics. including
key plesentations from both sides on CT European talgets
remain the focus ofthe relationship with Ef?v?; however. it is likely that CT North African
targets will have an expanded focus with END and Ef?v' as North Africa continues to
serve as a magnet for aspiring jihadists flom Europe. in addition. future discussions will
likely expand to Europeans traveling to-to fight in the ongoing-and the threat
they may pose upon retutn to Eutope.

 

in addition. SSG has been working with the END and Ef?v' on collection as
well as target discovery and development tradecraft. ln Dctober 2011. SSG paltneled
with SUSLAG and END to conduct a demonstration of to the Ef?v' using
Ef?v' domestic walranted collection. The END system successfully
processed DSL wiretap collection belonging to a German domestic CT talget. As a result
of this demonstration. the Ef?v' Vice President formally tequested the 
softwale from to further enable the Ef?v' to achieve its mission goal of
countering terrorist activities in Germany. Ey enhancing Ef?v' ?s lnternet analytic
capabilities through the provision of NSA will enable Gelmany to
provide unique contributions in the form of collection. data summaries. and-?or finished
intelligence to the high-priority NSA CT mission. The SPF approving the plovision of
to the Ef?v' was apploved on 25 Match 2013. The Telms of Reference
related to this effolt is curlently with the Germans for signature. which is expected in
mid-April.

(U) Date of Material

SEC 

SEE: 

to) 3 April 2o13

(U) POCs

(U) Driginator

_Foreign Partner Strategist. S21. -

(U) Alternate PDC

Foreign Partner Strategist. ST.

(U) Classi?cation Review by

Foreign Partner Strategist. 

SEE: 

