SIDToday - SIGINT Helps Hobble the Taleban by Cutting Off Their Livelihood

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET SI TK REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

SlDtodav Article
0 Letter to the Editor
0 SIGINT-V Social Media Page

 

 

SIGINT Helps Hobble the Taleban by Cutting Off Their
Livelihood

FROM:

Chief, NSA Georgia, Southwest Asia Narcotics Division 
Run Date: 02/03/2009

 

 

(U) Afghans prepare to Editor's summary: SIGINT provides the
burn seized opium (AFP) "dope" on the Taleban's reliance on the narcotics

10f4

SIDToday - SIGINT Helps Hobble the Taleban by Cutting Off Their Livelihood

(U) Afghans prepare to trade for money and support, prompting US and
burn seized Opium (App) Coalition leaders to expand their efforts to shut it

SIGINT supports a number ofsuccesses,
including the largest single seizure of drugs in
history, with the pace of counter-drug operations
increasing rapidly

 

 

A recent UN report estimates that the narcotics "industry" in
Afghanistan and Pakistan contributes $300 million annually to the Taleban. To
attack this narcotics - insurgency nexus, NSA Georgia's Southwest Asia Narcotics
Divisioin (SWAN - FGS2F) has worked closely with a number of colleagues,*
focusing on narcotics traf?cking networks that provide funding, weapons, and
logistical support to Taleban elements in Afghanistan.

The resulting SIGINT reporting, along with reporting from
other Intelligence Community elements, made clear to national and theater
leadership that the insurgency could not be defeated without disrupting
the narcotics trade. Additionally, some narcotics traf?ckers have been identi?ed
as active insurgent commanders, directing their own ?ghters in attacks against the
coalition, and procuring weapons and improvised explosive device (IED) materials.

 

In May 2008, FGS2F began providing
real-time support to counternarcotics operations
targeting processing laboratories, traf?ckers'
compounds, and the traf?ckers themselves as they were
on the move. Among the operations supported in
whole or in part by was the largest single
seizure of drugs in history, according to DEA -- 237
metric tons of hashish. In all, FGS2F and its colleagues
at NSAW, FSU, and GCHQ has provided real-time
intelligence to over 20 counternarcotics operations, netting thousands of kilograms
of drugs, several detainees, and weapons.

Pf Detainee
surrounded by opium
seized by Coalition
forces

 

 

 

As 2009 approached, the narcotics traf?cking - insurgency nexus
gained prominence in ISAF's (International Security Assistance Force, i.e. NATO
forces in Afghanistan) plan to defeat the Taleban. Narcotics traf?ckers were added
to the Joint Prioritized Effects List (I PE L) for the ?rst time, allowing them to be
targeted for strikes. In October 2008, NATO Defense Ministers agreed that
narcotics traf?cking networks were legitimate targets for ISAF forces, due to the
traf?ckers' ties to the insurgency.

 

., in December 2008, the Deputy

Taleban membf?rs Commander for Security in ISAF's Regional Command -
bear weapons In South declared narcotics traf?cking as his #1 priority.
Snowy 0f Concurrent with these events, SIGINT replaced
AfghamStan (Reuters) HUMINT as the primary driver of counternarcotics

operations, thanks in large part to the efforts of an

FGS2F analyst embedded with the lnteragency

Operations Coordination Center in Kabul . By

the end of 2008, Representative Afghanistan

 

 

 

20f4

SIDToday - SIGINT Helps Hobble the Taleban by Cutting Off Their Livelihood

reported that 80% of all counternarcotics operations were now SIGINT-
driven. A year previously, HUMINT was the driver for almost every operation.

Despite its relatively small size (18 personnel as of January 2009),
FGS2F continues to be a prominent part of the ?ght against the narco-insurgency
in Afghanistan, even as customer needs climb rapidly:

0 As of late January 2009, FGS2F was supporting an average of one
counternarcotics operation per week. By comparison, the last seven months of
2008 saw an average of just over one per month.

0 Two counternarcotics operations supported by FGS2F in January 2009 netted
over 6 metric tons (6,000 kilograms) of opium, worth millions of dollars --
described by one traf?cker as "a big loss." In 2008, by contrast, total opium
seizures measured only in the hundreds of kilograms.

0 When one of FGS2F's primary targets, Mullah Multan, made a rare entry into
Afghanistan from Pakistan, NSAW and NSAG combined to work with forward
elements to have a strike conducted on Multan's convoy within hours of
identifying his presence. Though Multan survived the strike, he was driven
back to Pakistan and suffered the loss of over 3 tons of opium along with six of
his cohorts -- a severe disruption to his narcotics network.

L) SIGINT efforts to target the ?ow of narcotics trade funding to the
Taleban are paying real dividends by disrupting ?nancing and logistical support
critical to the insurgency, saving lives and contributing to the Coalition's ability to
establish security throughout Afghanistan.

 

(U) A British ISAF soldier
photographs the destruction of
seized opium (lane's)

 

 

 

 

(U) Notes:

These colleagues were located at NSAW, GCHQ, Field Station Utah
(FSU), the Joint Narcotics Analysis Centre - London, and the Interagency
Operations Coordination Center (IOCC) in Kabul.

Editor's note: This article is reprinted from NSA Georgia's "Around
newsletter. See also a related SIDtoday article: "Customers Boosting
Presence in Afghanistan for 2009, and Are Doing the Same."

 

30f4

SlDToday - SIGINT Helps Hobble the Taleban by Cutting Off Their Livelihood

SIDtoday
articles may not be
republished or
reposted outside
without the
consent of 50121
(DL sid comms)."

Information Owner:

 

DYNAMIC PAGE --
HIGHEST POSSIBLE
CLASSIFICATION IS

TOP SECRET SI TK
REL TO USA AUS
CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM:
1-52,
DATED 08 JAN 2007
DECLASSIFY ON:
20320108

4of4

