TOP T//l\l 1 23

CNE Presence in CT10 Status Report

Authors:

SNIP Intern
1LT

(UIIFOUO) Executive Summary

USA, FVEY) This paper discusses the work completed as of 1 April
2008 on the inclusion of CNE data into the CT10 Pilot Project. engaged two
fronts in this effort. First, was the acquisition and alerting of active SIGINT into
CT10. Second, was the design of an extension to the current CT10 data model to
support further analytic development of CNE data. As a result of this work, CT10
now supports alerting of the establishment of new TAO points of presence on the
Internet with respect to certain exploitation methodologies. Additionally, this
paved the road with internal and external partners for the continued development
of the CT10 CNE data model extension.

USA, FVEY) Specific conclusions and recommendations are
contained at the close of this paper. However, three key points underpin a
majority of the information in this paper:

0 Priority support to CT10 data acquisition efforts.

- Further building a analytic and development team.

0 USA, FVEY) Development of a strategic vision for use of CNE
data in 

(UIIFOUO) TAO Data Flow Acquisition

USA, FVEY) The first step in processing CNE data is to identify and
acquire CNE data flows in order to route this information into This work
presents its own unique challenges,, as described in the next section.

(U) Current State

Derived From: 1?52
Dated: 20070108
Declassify 011: 20291123
TOP TO USA,


TOP 1 23

USA, FVEY) CT10 is ingesting a single flow of CNE data, specifically
FOXACID log files. This was identified as a top priority by CT10 customers
therefore it was chosen to be the first CNE data flow to pursue.
After mapping the flow of FOXACID data throughout NSA, CT10 established a
flow of this data from Protocol Exploitation starting in the middle of February
2008.

USA, FVEY) Because the CNE data model extension had not been
implemented at this time, the only way to process FOXACID logs was to fit the
information into the current CT10 data model. This was possible primarily
because of the natural flexibility in the current model. It was easy to define a new
?event type? within the CT10 ingestion system, and populate events with all
selectors pulled from the each FOXACID event. Another benefit of the current
model design was that it became easy to define a new selector type for an
implant ID and easily integrate it into the system. This allows implant IDs to be
added to watch lists and as target selectors, so that CT10 users can track any
events that are associated with a defined set of implants. Therefore, if CT10
acquired a data flow containing implant callback information, it would be easy to
add this into the current data model, giving additional capability to follow
implants deployed through FOXACID.

USA, FVEY) As a result of this work, the CT10 system is now alerting
on FOXACID exploitation activity through a suite of alerting technologies. This
includes gee-locational tipping in GeoT, and alerting through Agent Logic (IRC
and e-mails) and the iSpace dashboard.

USA, FVEY) One conclusion reached from developing the FOXACID
ingestion code is that the current CT10 data model can support more CNE data
than previously believed. As new CNE flows are introduced into the system, it
may be possible to easily add them to the current data model if the extension is
still not implemented.

(UIIFOUO) Near and Long Term Goals for TAO Data Flow
Acquisition

USA, FVEY) The near term goal regarding CNE data flow into CT10 is
to identify additional CNE data flows that build off of the FOXACID data. Based
on the requirements of the immediate next step would be to acquire
implant callback data flows. This would allow to track when their
implants are calling back to listening posts for tasking and exfiltration. The
implants in question are VALIDATOR, OLYUMPUS, UNITEDRAKE, and
STRAITBIZZAREUSA, FVEY) After establishing this data flow, the next step would be
to ingest collected data from the implants. This includes any exfiltrated files, and
implant plug-in results. With each new data flow, CT10 will have a more
complete picture of CNE activity related to their targets. However, these types of
data do not naturally fit into the current data model, which is why the proposed
extension is so important.

USA, FVEY) Additionally, there are other CNE datasets not created
by TAO that would be useful to CT GOLLUM, a partner implant, is one
such data set that has indicated that would be useful to ingest into
RADIUS logs (ISP dial up customer records) are also an excellent source
of information, and create a natural link between DNR and DNI datasets.

(U) Challenges I Way Ahead

USA, FVEY) There are a number of challenges for securing further
CNE data from TAO. First, given the complexity of TAO data flow, locating the
ultimate data owner is challenging. Though everyone in TAO CT10 has interacted
with on data flow issues has been extremely helpful, no new CNE flows have
been established. This is largely due to the fact that CT10 is not imbedded within
the requirements generation process in TAO. Additional transparency on TAO
data flow requirements will greatly ease this issue.

USA, FVEY) One other issue that would greatly help other systems in
using TAO data, is a universal marking and classification of CNE data. In the
case of FOXACID, there are no native classification markings on the files, and
compartmented targets as well as FISA data have to be stripped out by TAO
before data is sent on to external customers such as As CT10 becomes PL3
accredited, it becomes critical that CT10 ingests full FOXACID records.
Unfortunately, the lack of a unique marking and classification for each file creates
additional challenges that complicate the oversight, classification and policy
surrounding CNE data. Furthermore, additional discussions with TAO have
indicated that this may be an issue for other data flows as well. The addition of
classification markings to TAO data feeds would greatly assist all consumers of
TAO data with maintaining the proper security procedures.

TAO engineers have worked towards creating an RDF database
system that would house all of their information, and make it available to external
customers. As this capability is developed, CT10 could benefit greatly from
becoming a consumer of this data. This system would address a number of
issues, including the marking and classification challenge addressed in the
previous paragraphUSA, FVEY) In summary, the way ahead is to address these existing
challenges in order to effectively push more TAO data flows out to in
near real time. should also remained with effort to develop
and deploy the RDF database. Finally, needs to implement the data model
extension and move any currently ingested TAO data into the new model.

TOP 1 23

