UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

Reference: OPC-M/TECH.B/61
Date:	13 June 2011

Copy no:

A potential technique to deanonymise users of the
TOR network

OPC-MCR, GCHQ
Summary

A new technique to deanonymise users of the TOR network is demonstrated. It is shown
that the majority of a small truthed set of data can be deanonymised without any false
hits anywhere in eight bearer-hours of data.

For this algorithm to be further tested we must run some TOR exit nodes and collect
data from these. SIGINT packet logging of guard node traffic is also required.
Demonstration software is available in the form of an R. package from

Copy Distribution

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

[18 pages]

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FQIA) and may be exempt under other UK
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

2

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA)andmavbeexemptunderotherUI^^
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

A potential technique to deanonymise users of the

TOR network

13 June 2011

1	Introduction

The Onion Router (TOR) [1] is used by individuals and organisations that want to hide
the originating IP address of their communications.

A TOR client chooses the circuit their traffic will follow through a set of TOR routers
before contacting the destination server. The first hop after the client is to the subset of
the routers designated as “guard” nodes. The final hop in the TOR network is from a
subset of routers which choose to be an “exit” node. There can be any number of TOR
routers between the guard and exit nodes but typical clients choose to have one router.

There arc many features that mean it is hard to track traffic through the TOR
network:

•	Traffic is encrypted in multiple layers between the client node and each TOR
router (leading to the “Onion” analogy). Hence data between each TOR router
has different ciphertexts. Unencrypted traffic is only seen between the exit node
and destination server.

•	TOR splits all traffic up into standard size “cells”. Therefore packet sizes can not
be used to follow traffic.

•	Each connection between TOR routers will typically multiplex many circuits’ traffic
effectively masking any particular user’s traffic.

•	To ensure fairness of service TOR has a per-circuit rate-limiting storc-and-forward
buffer in each router. This buffer tends to flatten timing features in traffic. [3]

The aim of this work is to find the client IP address associated with unencrypted
traffic between an exit node and a destination server. This paper achieves this aim given
the following constraints:

•	We must own the exit node. This constraint means that we can demultiplex traffic
by TOR circuit and thus get a cleaner signal. Sec section 5 for more detail.

3

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA)andmavbeexemptunderotherUI^^^^
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

•	Wc must be able to log the paeket times of the traffic from the guard node to the
client.

•	The TOR communication must be long and structured. Wc will demonstrate the
technique against a single user browsing the web via TOR.

•	The client must not be running a TOR router of their own - otherwise we can not
separate the client’s own traffic from other TOR traffic.

The attack we will present is based on correlating exit node and guard node traffic and
does not require tracking communications through any intermediate link in the TOR
network. This approach should help maximise the chance of a successful attack despite
incomplete SIGINT coverage.

2	Test data

Wc arc going to work with two sets of data:

1.	Truthed data where we have matched guard node and exit node traffic for a single
user web browsing.

2.	Bulk traffic logs for guard nodes from four SIGINT bearers.

Wc will try to develop techniques that can correctly match up the truth data but not
false alarm anywhere in the bulk SIGINT logs.

2.1	Truthed data

TOR is designed to make it hard to link client and exit, node traffic together. In conjunc-
tion with ICTR-NE and JTRIG we came up with a way to collect the exit node traffic
from our own web browsing. As illustrated in figure 1 we used a virtual private server
(VPS) as an intermediate destination for our traffic. Wc then run packet loggers on our
client machine and the VPS.

We run an open HTTP proxy server on the VPS. Wc want to run an open proxy server
to ensure that there is minimal impact on the data flows (which, for example, authenti-
cation may introduce) whilst still being able to conduct representative web browsing. A
risk of an open proxy server is that other internet users may use it thus potentially lead-
ing to unlawful traffic interception. To avoid this danger we changed our “User-Agent”
string to a non-standard value and the proxy server was configured to only respond to
this user agent. Furthermore the proxy server was only active for the brief duration of
the experiment. This setup was approved by JTRIG. No traffic due to other users was
detected in the packet logs.

4

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA)andmavbeexemptunderotherUI^^
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

Figure 1: Our test data collection infrastructure. We control the two shaded hosts and
run packet logging on these hosts. We connect, to the public TOR network (guard node
“G” and exit node “E” arc shown) using default settings of the TOR button. Wc then
browse public web sites.

On our client we used the standard "TO Ft button” web-browser extension to access
TOR with two minor modifications. Firstly, we changed the internal TOR button proxy
(polipo) to use our open HTTP proxy after transiting TOR. Secondly, we changed the
web-browser User-Agent to match that accepted by our open HTTP proxy.

Four experiments of about ten minutes each were conducted:

1.	“News”: Search on Bing for news, followed by browsing BBC News and then the
Washington Post.

2.	"TOR”: browsing the TOR website and then using a privacy checking website.

3.	“Download”: visit to SlashDot followed by downloading a large PDF hie.

4.	“Forum”: Search on Google followed by browsing a PC technical help forum.

Packet logs were collected for each of these. In each experiment one guard node and one
exit node was used apart from in experiment 2 where TOR set up a new path during the
experiment with a change in both guard node and exit node. Therefore we will generally
split experiment 2 into the two circuits “2a” and “2b”.

2.2	Bulk data

To prove a low false alarm rate of any algorithm we need bulk data. We used IP
address dumps from four internet bearers (two were “client-server” bearers and two were
“server-client” bearers). The data was kindly collected by GTE with their high-speed

5

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FQIA) and may be exempt under other UK
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

data recorder. The timestamps arc microsecond accurate but the data comes with no
packet size, protocol or port information. Each capture was two hours long totalling
eight hours of collection.

We identify TOR traffic by use of “consensus logs” [4] which arc imported by ICTR-
NE. The TOR network decides what nodes arc part of the network and what their roles
are. We filter the SIGINT packet traces to packets that satisfy:

•	One IP address being a guard node as identified in the consensus log closest to the
data collection period, and

•	The other IP address not being seen any the consensus log from a month surround-
ing that period.

This approach will inaccurately identify traffic between clients and guard nodes; the
inaccuracy comes from the fact that the guard nodes may be doing other non-TOR
communication. We therefore believe that we will approximately filter down to a superset
of the wanted traffic.

We note that these filtering rules mean that we will ignore any clients that also run a
TOR node. However this constraint will still apply for a potential operational scenario
where we also run guard nodes; without full knowledge of the client one can not tell
whether a circuit is terminating in the client or being relayed through its TOR node.

3	Why we are not tracking a circuit through the
TOR network

When we started this work, we considered attacks that tried to follow data through the
TOR network. However an initial experiment based on JTRIG browsing logs showed
that SIGINT visibility was too low for a significant chance of success.

We will now describe the experiment conducted but the rest of the section is not
required reading.

We compare two sources of data:

•	Communication between TOR servers seen in SIGINT. TDSD deployed an ICTR
signature (in Squeal) to detect communication between TOR nodes across the
SIGINT fleet for two days in December 2010. To remove signature false hits we
filter down to hits where both IP addresses arc known to be TOR routers (by
consensus logs [4] from the same period).

•	TOR links used by JTRIG for a similar period. JTRIG log the usage of TOR
connections. Each of their circuits typically have two links between TOR routers.

6

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Ac^200fWFOI^^ancHriaW)^exemp^jndei^ther^l^^^^
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

There were 1958 TOR routers in the relevant consensus files of which 1893 had
signature hits. We consider links between TOR routers as undirected and an all pairs
calculations allows us to estimate that there arc 1.79 to 1.92 million possible links in the
TOR network (we do not know whether we do not see a router due to it being off or
invisible to us).

However we only see 6185 links between TOR routers in the SIGINT logs. Therefore
we are seeing about 0.3% of possible TOR links in SIGINT. Note this percentage is likely
to be an small underestimate of the visibility of TOR links as most TOR circuits will
consist of two links within the TOR network: one link involving a guard node and one
link involving an exit node. Based on the consensus logs there are 1.65 million links that
satisfy this constraint: this link count raises visibility to 0.4%.

The JTRIG logs use 8294 links between TOR nodes of which we see 13. Therefore
we could only see 0.16% of JTRIG used TOR links in SIGINT.

The JTRIG link visibility percentage and the population link visibility percentage
suggest a significantly different underlying distribution (p-value between 0.005 and 0.01).
TOR is claimed to use a server's geolocation to choose circuits, perhaps this circuit
choosing algorithm hinders our visibility.

If we assume the visibility of each link in a 2-path within the TOR network is inde-
pendent then the chance of seeing any particular 2-path is between 1 in 100,000 and 1
in 400,000. In the JTRIG logs of 2935 paths we would expect to observe both links of
one or more paths with probability 0.7% to 3%. We saw one so either we were lucky or
link visibility is correlated in a path.

To complete a circuit trace you would also need to see the clicnt-to-guard-node traffic
and the exit-node- to-server traffic which would lower the probability of visibility yet
further. We believe such probabilities are too low for a useful attack and thus we do not
consider circuit tracing attacks further.

4	Correlating guard and exit node traffic

We will use the correlation in the timing of data packets between guard and exit nodes
to deanonymise TOR. There arc two features that we need to remember about TOR:

•	TOR rcpackctiscs the data which means that packets and packet sizes can not be
exactly followed through the network

•	Each TOR node has a rate-limiting storc-and-forward methodology which will af-
fect packet timings

These two factors means that a burst of packets entering the TOR network will be
smeared out over time into cells that do not directly map to the input packets and
comparing histograms of guard and exit traffic is hard [3].

7

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Ac^200fWFOI^^ancHriaW)^exemp^jndei^ther^l^^^
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

Our main insight is to consider cumulative distributions rather than histograms. In
particular we will consider cumulative packet count and cumulative TCP payload bytes.
We hope that over a long time window that there will Ire approximate conservation of
these quantities and the impact of rate limiting will be less significant (rate limiting will
just impose a maximum gradient).

In figure 2 and figure 3 we show cumulative packet counts and cumulative TCP
payload sizes for our truth data. It can be seen that a lot of features arc preserved - it
seems sensible to consider that comparison of these cumulative plots between guard and
exit node traffic could lead to a deanonymisation technique.

Considering figure 2 in more detail one can sec steps in these plots replicated between
guard node and exit node traffic for all the plots apart from perhaps “CtoS 4” - perhaps
clicnt-to-servcr traffic is harder to deanonymise. You can also see that there arc changes
in scale (for example in experiment 3 there arc more guard node packets than exit node
packets).

Figure 3 of cumulative TCP payloads shows some similar features. All the server-
to-clicnt graphs show preserved steps. However the clicnt-to-server graphs do not show
very clear relationships. In particular looking at “CtoS 3”, you can see a big difference
during the download of the large PDF file. The exit node is sending TCP ACKs with no
payload back to the server but the client is sending larger TOR acknowledgement cells
back which leads to a large difference in graph shape.

Therefore we will consider deanonymisation based on cumulative packet counts. As
well as looking like a generally cleaner picture than using TCP payload, such an approach
requires loss data to be collected by the SIGINT system. This easier data collection is
exemplified by our bulk data logs - these logs do not contain packet sizes, let alone TCP
payload sizes.

5	Why we want to own the exit node

SIGINT gives us two added complications that the above truth data analysis above has
ignored:

1. Each exit node is serving many clients which will add unwanted data into the traf-
fic for a single user. TOR users are encouraged to run privacy-preserving proxies
(e.g. privoxy or polipo) and these proxies try to normalise the traffic so that ev-
eryone shares the same HTTP header format. The impact of this is that SIGINT
proxy demultiplexing techniques can not reliably be used. It is potentially possible
to try and demultiplex traffic via content analysis (e.g. looking at what links are
included in webpages) but such a technique would be complex and fragile to HTML
formatting errors and require all wet) browsing to be non-cncrypted.

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Ac^200fWFOI^^ancHriaW)^exemp^jndei^thef^K
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

Cumulative packet count

Exit

Guard

Figure 2: Cumulative packet count for the four truthed sessions. On the left-hand side
the clicnt-to-server traffic is shown. On the right-hand side the servcr-to-client traffic is
shown. The second truthed session is split into the two significant circuits used.

9

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Ac^200fWFOI^^ancHriaW)^exemp^jndei^ther^l^^
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

Cumulative payload

Exit

Guard

15:46 15:48 15:50 15:52 15:54 15:56

StoC	1

15:46 15:48 15:50 15:52 15:54 15:56

Figure 3: Cumulative payload bytes for the four truthed sessions. On the left-hand side
the clicnt-to-server traffic is shown. On the right-hand side the scrver-to-clicnt traffic is
shown. The second truthed session is split into the two significant circuits used.

10

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information /
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCHQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

2.	Limited SIGINT coverage will mean we will only see a subset of the exit node
traffic. The exit node could be contacting servers anywhere on the internet and
unless we have collection very close to the exit node we are likely to only sec a
subset of these connections.

A potential approach around these problems is to demultiplex by HTTP server. We
hope that (in a time window) there might only be one user browsing a particular website
so demultiplexing by server will therefore demultiplex by user too. We also hope for
complete collection of some of these streams as packets will hopefully follow a small
number of routes between the exit node and the HTTP server.

We show the influence of demultiplexing by HTTP server in figure 4. It can be seen
that the clear picture in the previous section is no longer present; a modern webpage is
typically made up of content from many different HTTP servers. By eye it can be seen
that it is hard to link many of these fragments of traffic per HTTP server to the guard
node traffic. Indeed using the mathematical technique we will describe in the following
section only four of the server-to-clicnt HTTP traces could be successfully linked to guard
node traffic.

We therefore recommend that we analyse traffic from exit nodes that we control.
Such an approach has several desirable features:

•	We can demultiplex exit node traffic by client as the TOR exit node can associate
all traffic with a circuit. Complex (and potentially inaccurate) demultiplexing
algorithms are not required.

•	We collect all exit node traffic for each client circuit (as opposed to SIGINT which
may only give fragments of the traffic). We therefore have the cleanest possible
data.

•	We hope to deanonymise all traffic for a circuit rather than just fragments of the
traffic which may not contain the data of interest to an analyst.

•	A resultant database of TOR traffic would give a simple place to experiment and
deploy TOR deanonymisation analytics.

The NSA have already demonstrated the demultiplexing of traffic in a TOR exit
node [2],

6	Score

We compare an exit trace and a guard node trace using basic linear regression (building
on a suggestion of	We bin time up into 1 second bins (i = 1. . .T):

11

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FQIA) and may be exempt under other UK_

information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

Cumulative packet count per host

Guard

Guard (secondary)

Exit.a.fsdn.com
Exit.analyze.privacy.net
Exit.a.tsgstatic.com
Exit.attach.tsgstatic.com
Exit.c.tsgstatic.com
Exit.forums.techguy.org

CtoS_____________________{ 1 }

15:46 15:48 15:50 15:52 15:54 15:56

Exit.media3.washingtonpost.com

Exit.media.washingtonpost.com

Exit. news, bbci mg.co. UK

Exit.www.bing.com

Exit.www.governmentattic.org

Exit.www.onion-router.net

Exit.www.torproject.org

Exit.www.washingtonpost.com

StoC_____________________{ 2 }



16:02	16:04	16:06	16:08

16:22	16:24	16:26	16:28

Time (hh:mm)

Figure 4: Cumulative packet count for the four truthed sessions but with exit traffic
split across the main hosts contacted. On the left-hand side the clicnt-to-scrver traffic is
shown. On the right-hand side the server-to-clicnt traffic is shown.

12

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FQIA) and may be exempt under other UK
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

this choice is slightly arbitrary but does match the timing precision reported by most
SIGINT systems. In each bin wc then have a pair (Ei:Gi) where Ei is the cumulative
exit node packet count at time i and Gi is the cumulative guard node packet count at
time i.

Our primary measure of association is the correlation between Ei and Gi as measured
by the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient r. Wc expect that when the two
traffic streams are associated that a very high correlation coefficient will result. We
note that high correlation coefficients are generally expected as we're comparing two
increasing sequences.

To remove false positives we also fit the following basic linear model:

Gi = a + ¡3Ei	(1)

Wc then use (3 to discard bad matches. Wc expect that a similar number of packets arc
expected in both traces - we only consider traces where 1/2 < ¡3 < 2.

A key consideration is how to handle guard node and exit node traces that do not
precisely overlap. We arc assuming that our exit node trace is the complete log of a
TOR circuit. On the other hand, the guard node trace may contain traffic for other
TOR circuits. Wc therefore truncate the guard node trace to the period of the exit node
trace. Wc also pad the guard node packet counts with zero if required to span the exit
node trace.

In addition we consider score all possible time shifts of the guard node trace against
the exit node trace - i.e. trying out different timing offsets. Wc do this as we do not
know the clock offset in our truth data set and to be as generous as possible in finding
false positives in the bulk logs. It is not known whether such a sliding approach may
prove useful in practice with known clock offsets; it is possible that such an approach
may also combat unknown delays in the TOR network.

7	Results

We first show results of the proposed technique on our truth data set and then consider
false positive rates.

As mentioned above we will slide the putative guard node and exit nodes traces
against each other to allow for an unknown clock offset between the client and HTTP
proxy in the truth data set and to give us the maximum number of comparisons when
trying to assess the false positive rate.

7.1	True positives in the truth data

The first experiments arc to understand the behaviour of the algorithm on the truth
data. In figure 5 we show plots of r2 and /3 as the time offset is varied. It can be seen

13

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information A
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCHQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

beta -------- r^2

-500	0	500

Figure 5: The correlation r2 and the linear regression coefficient j3 as the time offset
between the guard node and exit node traffic is varied.

14

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FQIA) and may be exempt under other UK
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

Sample	Client-to-servcr	Server-to-clicnt
1	0.9977	0.9991
2a	0.9238	0.9464
2b	0.9957	0.9983
3	0.9952	0.9998
4	0.9975	0.9983

Tabic 1: The maximum values of r2 achieved on the truth data

Server to client

Server to client

o.o

0.2





0.8

V

1.0

0.4	0.6

False positive rate

le-06

I	r

1e-04	1e-02	1e+00

False positive rate

Figure 6: The ROC curve for the scrver-to-client direction (false-positive rate shown on
a linear axis in the left plot and on a logarithmic axis in the right plot).

that correlations close to 1 are achieved at time offsets close to 0. The short circuit “2a”
fails to achieve a high correlation. Sensible values for [J also result, in particular in the
scrvcr-to-clicnt direction. The maximum value of the correlation is also shown in table 1
and it can Ire seen that higher correlations arc achieved in the server-to-clicnt direction.

7.2	False positives in the bulk data

We now compare our truth exit traces to the bulk data set and sec if we find any false
positives. As previously mentioned we’re sliding time to allow as many traces as possible
to be included.

In the server-to-clicnt direction, we can choose a threshold of 0.998 such that we only
miss one true positive whilst having no false positives. The one circuit we miss is “2a”
where the session is short (the main activity is only over 33 seconds). The ROC curve
looks very good, figure 6.

15

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FQIA) and may be exempt under other UK_

information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

Client to server

Client to server

Figure 7: The ROC curve for the clicnt-to-scrver direction (false-positive rate shown on
a linear axis in the left plot and on a logarithmic axis in the right plot).

In the clicnt-to-servcr direction, the true and false cases are not so well separated, sec
figure 7. We arc not able to detect any true positives without some false hits. This poor
separation is probably due to there being less distinctive structure in the elient-to-server
direction; HTTP requests share a similar size.

In the scrver-to-clicnt direction a threshold of 0.998 finds the true cases (except
“2a”) without any false hits. We can try to extrapolate what this false hit rate means to
SIGINT collection. It is likely that one would restrict the time slide; we would imagine a
maximum of 5 seconds may be sensible as opposed to the 2 hours in each bearer we have
allowed. If we imagine restacking our 5 circuits x 4 bearers x 120 minutes of collection
into 288 circuits x 100 bearers x 10 seconds you could imagine it is possible we could run
288 test circuits against an aperture of 100 bearers without false hitting when allowing
ourselves to slide the time window by 5 seconds. With our current test data we can't
promise a lower false positive rate and further experimentation with sustained collection
would be required to better evaluate a false positive rate.

8	Software

We provide a reference implementation of the algorithm as an R package “fiowcompare”.
Three functions arc provided:

formatflowdata Formats data to that used internally in the algorithm.

16

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Ac^200fWFOI^^ancHriaW)^exemp^jndei^ther^l^^
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

scoreflowpair Scores a pair of flows at all time offsets or at a limited range of time
offsets.

findbestmatchingflow Find the guard flow that best matches an exit flow.

Wc also include our truth data as a data frame called tortruth. This package is available

9	Conclusion

Wc have a shown a technique that can deanonymise TOR web-browsing given packet
times between the client and guard node and packet times from the exit node filtered to
a single circuit. The false positive rate looks low enough to suggest this technique should
be carried forward.

The required data is not collected at present. For this technique to work the following
additional data feeds will be required:

•	Second-accurate packet logging at TOR exit nodes we control with packets labelled
by a unique circuit identifier.

•	Second-accurate packet logging of sessions between TOR clients and TOR guard
nodes. This data could be obtained by SIGINT or by running guard nodes. The
SIGINT solution would require an up-to-date feed of TOR “consensus” documents:
TOR IP addresses could then be extracted from the “consensus” documents for
filtering by the SIGINT system.

At the time of writing JTRIG are investigating the collection of the exit node data and
ICTR.-FSP arc trialling a feed of guard node data from research bearers.

Wider testing is recommended to better characterise the false positive rate. A first
test case (both because we have truth data and for InfoScc purposes) may be to try and
deanonymise JTRIG TOR usage.

References

[1]	Various TOR resources linked

[2]	NBA TOR capability reported by

[3]	Options for further research into the Tor network. B/7694BA/5001/3/104.
2 February 2010. DISCOVER 6722909.

17

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA) and may be exempt under other UK
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCFIQ on

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

OPC-M/TECH.B/61

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

18

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA) and may be exempt under other UK
information legislation. Refer any FOIA queries to GCHQ

UK TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT