TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

BULLRUN Col - Briefing Sheet

Introduction

1.	The ability to exploit targets’ encrypted communications is extremely fragile and is

often enabled through sensitive EC I programmes. The need to take additional
measures to protect that capability haslongbeen recognised. Currently, virtually
all decryption is carried out by PTD	processing with decrypts going to

the MB in the NOCON Col; some decrypts are placed in the ENDUE Col due to
the sensitivity or fragility of the exploitation capability.

2.	In recent years there has been an aggressive effort, lead by NS A, to make major
improvements in defeating network security and privacy involving multiple
sources and methods, all of which are extremely sensitive and fragile. These
include: Computer Network Exploitation (CNE); collaboration with other
Intelligence Agencies; investment in high-performance computers; and
development of advanced mathematical techniques. Several EC I compartments
may apply to the specific sources, methods, and techniques involved.

3.	Making the best use of these new capabilities requires that decryption processing
be widely deployed beyond PTD and the results of that processing be available to
a wide range of analysts. This inevitably makes it harder to protect this sensitive
and fragile capability and we need to counterbalance this by introducing
measures to control access to this material and heighten awareness of the
sensitivities amongst those who have access.

4.	To achieve this, NSA has introduced the BULLRUN Col to protect our abilities to
defeat the encryption used in network communication technologies. This covers
both the 'fact of" a capability against a specific technology and resulting decrypts
(which may be either plaintext or metadata (events). GCHQ is also introducing
BULLRUN. (CSEC, DSD and GCSB are expected to do likewise.)

Control Authority

5.	The BULLRUN Col is owned by the Deputy Director for Penetrating Target
Defences (PTD). Authority to manage theColisdelegatedto the PTD Lead for
Special Operations and Policy (currently^^^^^^^B arid the PTD Security
and Release Authority (OPC-SEC, currently

BULLRUN Sensitivity and Coverage

6.	It is imperative to protect the fact that GCHQ, NSA and their Sigint partners have
capabilities against specific network security technologies as well as the number
and scope of successes. These capabilities are among the Sigint community’s
most fragile, and the inadvertent disclosure of the simple fact of could alert the
adversary and result in immediate loss of the capability. Consequently, any
admission of fact of" a capability to defeat encryption used in specific network
communication technologies or disclosure of details relating to that capability
must be protected by the BULLRUN CO I and restricted to those specifically

1 of 4

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on

TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

indoctrinated for BULLRUN. The various types of security covered by BULLRUN
include, but are not limited to, TLS/SSL, https (e g . webmail), SSH, encrypted
chat, VPNs and encrypted VOIP. The specific instances of these technologies
that can be exploited will be published in a separate Annexe (available to
BULLRUN indoctrinated staff).

7.	In addition to the specific technologies that GCHQ or its Sigint partners are able
to exploit, the methods used to achieve the exploitation must also be protected.
These include support from other organisations, both internal and external to
GCHQ. Access to BULLRUN does NOT imply any “need-to-know" the details of
sources and methods used to achieve exploitation and, in general, there will be
NO “need-to-know". Requests for access to information on sources and methods
should be sent to OPC-SEC; if considered appropriate, this access may require
clearanceforcertainECIs.

8.	BULLRUN material, data, and details must be protected with the use of the
BULLRUN Col and be marked with the label "BULLRUN," in addition to the
required privacy marking and other descriptors. Use of the BULLRUN marking
is restricted to GCHQ and its Sigint 2nd Parties,

Access and Security

9.	Requests for access to the Col must be sponsored by a GC8 or above and must
be accompanied by a business case outlining the “need-to-know". Access for
contractors will be limited and will require a strong business case; such requests
should be discussed with the Col Authority’s delegates before submission.
Requests for access are to be sent by email to PTDAccesses.

10.	Knowledge of BULLRUN information and access to the BULLRUN Col will only
be granted to indoctrinated individuals.

11.	It is the responsibility of sponsors (or their successors) to notify OPC-SEC (via
PTDAccesses) when an individual no longer require access to BULLRUN.

Handling Procedures

12.	Owners of BULLRUN materials are responsible for correctly marking the
information and for ensuring that it is handled according to guidelines for
protecting classified or CO I information.

13.	Reports derived from BULLRUN material shall not reveal (or imply) that the
source data was decrypted. The network communication technology that carried
the communication should not be revealed.

14.	Further dissemination, other than in product reports, of any data or information
derived from BULLRUN data must be thoroughly justified and receive prior
approval from OPC-SEC.

2	of 4

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Fieedomof lnformation^t2fiC0andmaybesubiecttoexemptbnundcr
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ

TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

15.	All questions or concerns regarding BULLRUN material and information should
be directed to OPC-SEC.

Protective Marking Guidance

The following offers some guidance on Protective Markings (PM) for BULLRUN
material. Questions regarding PMs can be directed to the Col Authority’s delegates.

At SECRET STRAP1 COMINT AUSCANZUKUS EYES :

The fact that GCHQ has unspecified capabilities against network security
technologies eg TLS/SSL, HTTPS, SSH, VPNs, IPSec. NB capability does not
necessarily equate to decryption capability.

At TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT AUSCANZUKUS EYES :

The fact that GCHQ or its 2nd Party partners has some capability against the
encryption used in a class or type of network communications technology. For
example, VPNs, IPSec, TSL/SSL, HTTPS, SSH, encrypted chat, encrypted VoIP.

At TOP SECRET STRAP2 COMINT BULLRUN AUSCANZUKUS EYES :

The fact that GCHQ or a 2nd Party partner has a capability against a specific
encrypted network security technology - see Annexe for details. (At a minimum,
specific capabilities may be protected by additional EC Is and restriction on 'Eyes1’,)

The fact that GCHQ or its partners exploits specific encrypted network
communications - see Annexe for details. (At a minimum, specific capabilities may
be protected by additional EC Is and restriction on ‘Eyes1’,)

Decrypts (plaintext or derived events / metadata) obtained from BULLRUN
capabilities. (At a minimum, specific capabilities may be protected by additional
restriction on ‘Eyes1’ and, in a few cases, additional EC Is.)

GLOSSARY

(U) HTTPS - HTTP traffic secured inside an SSL/TLS session, indicated by the
https://URL, commonly using TCP port 443

(U) IPSEC -- IPSec, or IP Security, is the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
standard for layer 3 real-time communication security. IPSec allows two hosts (or two
gateways) to establish a secure connection, sometimes called a tunnel. All traffic is
protected at the network layer.

(U) SSH - Secure Shell, A common protocol used for secure remote computer
access

(U) SSL - Secure Sockets Layer. Commonly used to provide secure network
communication. Widely used on the internet to provide secure web browsing,
webmail, instant messaging, electronic commerce, etc.

3	of 4

f his irfomi atbn is exen’pt from d is closure under the-1-reed am of Inform^jor^to^GO^^^m^^ubiccy^xernDtjomjnder
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ

TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT

(U) TLS - Transport Layer Security. The follow-on to SSL, SSLv3 and TLSvl,0 are
nearly identical.

(U) VoIP - Voice over Internet Protocol, A general term for the using IP networks to
make voice phone calls. The application layer protocol can be standards-based (e g,,

H.323, SIP), or proprietary (e g,, Skype).

(U) VPN - Virtual Private Network. A private network that makes use of the public
telecommunications infrastructure, maintaining privacy via the use of a tunneling
protocol and security procedures that typically include encryption. Common protocols
include IPSEC and PPTP.

4 of 4

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Fieedomof lnformation^t2fiC0andmaybesubiecttoexemptbnundcr
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests toGCHQ on

TOP SECRET STRAP1 COMINT