TOP SECRET 
Innov

Experiment Profile

 

 

 

 

 

 

Experiment Name Experiment
Servrces Reference
Version Date
(NSA) NSAIS3ICES
Experiment Owner Department GCHQIPTD
(GCHQ)
Experiment Start Date 0610112010 Experiment End Date Early 2011

 

 

 

 

Part 1 Experiment Overview

 

Business Case I

 

 

As part of the Joint Capability Activity (JCA) in partnership with GCHQ, experiments
are to be conducted within the Joint Capability Experiment (JCE) to test the
robustness, scalability and interoperability of services integrated into
the corporate high speed DNI architectures of each agency. The 
services experiment will explore a new hardware configuration for sensitive
mission applications integrated into a secure processing enclave
interfacing to the corporate high speed DNI architecture. This will also include the
testing of hardware accelerated at the frontend. The business case for
running this experiment is to demonstrate the following:

Stress the processing capability under heavy load of ?tasked? common
internet technologies
Test the throughput capability of common internet 
technologies processing including:
- Higher bandwidth common internet technologies
streams
- Throughput of ISLANDTRANSPORT messaging support for CA
Service requests to NSAW LONGHAUL key recovery service
- The temporary storage of data while waiting for a
response from LONGHAUL
Test the Hardware accelerated (CAVIUM card) common internet
technologies processing component
Test the impact of XKEYSCORE as Stage 2 of TU RMOIL for follow on
processing of exploited common internet technologies

 

 

streams
lnnov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 1 Of 8
rs exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be to under

other UK legrslatrorr. Refer Llrseloerre requests to GCHQ orr

TOP SECRET 

 

TOP SECRET 

 

Benefits

 

 

 

Outcome Expected Benefit How will KPI (CSF) Reference
benefit he Number
measured?

 

Validation of the new
hardware chosen for

processing

 

Integration of hardware
accelerated 

 

Ability to cope with high
throughput and
bandwidth of common
internet 
technologies

 

Ability to prioritize
processing
appropriately

 

Ability to process
multiple common
internet 
technologies
exploitation capabilities
concurrently

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Plan

 

 

The Services processing experiment will consist of several additive
experiments. The first two will mostly consist of preparatory work. The subsequent
experiment will explore scalability and interoperability.

Note that the below list is not exhaustive; this represents the initial list of experiments
to be conducted in JCE with respect to services. Subsequent
experimentation upon conclusion of the below experiments will be negotiated with
INNOV8 as appropriate.

EXP. 1: Test dataflow month) This experiment will set up and configure the new
processing hardware as well as basic dataflows into the 
services for further experimentation. Streaming dataflows of common internet
technologies and ISLANDTRANSPORT dataflows to LONGHAUL for
recovery will be established. This experiment will ensure that the
services can properly process data using existing capabilities from NSA-
centric TURMOIL systems. Additionally, the appropriate analytics will be put in place
and evaluated to identify viable candidate input streams (case notations) containing
the common internet technologies of interest.

EXP. 2: Stress testing month) This experiment will stress test the current suite of
services to identify the baseline throughput and scalability parameters.

 

lnnov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 2 Of 8

This inlorn'iation is exempt lrom disclosure under the ol lnlorn'iation Act 2000 and may be subject to exen'iption under

other UK inlorn'iation legislation. Reler disclosure requests to GCHQ on?
TOP SECRET 

 

 

TOP SECRET STRAP1

 

This experiment will leverage and validate candidate input streams (case notations)
containing the common internet technologies of interest.

EXP. 3: Integration of new processing functionality (4-6 months)
This experiment will introduce new and enhanced capabilities to increase throughput,
scalability and interoperability. This will include but not be limited to hardware
accelerated agile management of buffered data, the
development of an interoperable API for sharing CA services requests across
and key recovery architectures, the ability for follow-on
processing architectures to consume large volumes exploited common internet
technologies of interest.

 

 

PUT Involvement

 

 

Team members includeT53
GCHQ
- 

 

 

Migration Approach

 

 

 

The goal is to transition new capabilities as they are tested and validated
in the JCE environment into the JPC operational environment to provide mission
value.

 

lnnov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 3 Of 8

This inlormation is exempt lrom disclosure under the Freedom ol lnlormation Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under
other UK inlormation legislation. Reler disclosure requests to GCHQ on

TOP SECRET STRAP1

 

 

 

TOP SECRET STRAP1
Part 2 - Experiment Detail

 

High Level Description of
Experiment

 

 

 

Same as Business case.

 

 

System Network Diagrams

 

 

System c? Network Diat rams
TOP TO USA, 

Exploitation of Common Internet 
Technologies

Cipher Start

 
 
 
 
 
  
  

 

 

4
'1

Validation of
results

 

CA Service Requests

  
 
   

4? -b
NSAICES
Enclave

boundary

 

Storage
Of 
content

Hardware
Accelerated


 

TOP TO USA, 

 

 

Hardware Requirements

 

 

The services experiment requires the inclusion of 4 IBM 3650 M3
servers (2 servers per 106 LPT) to run the sensitive mission
applications. The processing servers are dedicated to 
processing and are firewalled off from the rest of the LPT system. These are an
extension of the ES enclave and can only be administered by
CES approved sys-admins. This will include appropriately cleared for
monitoring and auditing purposes. The individuals will need to have a minimum of ECI
PIQARESQU E. The results of processing will be FVEY for
the purposes of this experiment.

 

 

Software Requirements

 

 

 

Owner should detail here any additional software requirements and the steps taken to procure the
required items. Note: All software should be registered with SAM.

 

Innov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 4 Of 8

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on

TOP SECRET STRAP1

 

 

 

 

TOP SECRET STRAP1

 

Connectivity (Dataflows)

 

 

The success of the services experiment relies on the ability to extract
and pass parameters associated with common internet 
technologies to for attack and recovery. The 
parameters are extracted in the processing servers and passed to
via a corporate messaging system (ISLAN DTRANSPORT)
connection. The messages are prior to leaving the processing
servers using the secure corporate messaging software (ISLANDHIDEAWAY) for
security and authentication.

 

 

Data Requirements

 

 

This experiment will leverage and validate candidate input streams (case notations)
containing the common internet technologies of interest.

 

 

Data Repositories

 

 

 

 

Legalities

 

 

 

 

Additional Support

 

 

 

 

Data Access

 

 

 

 

External Dependencies

 

 

 

 

Previous I Related Work

 

 

 

 

Innov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 5 Of 8

This inlormation is exempt Irom disclosure under the ol lnlormation Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK inlormation legislation. Reler disclosure requests to GCHQ on 
TOP SECRET STRAP1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TOP SECRET STRAP1

Innov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 5 Of 8

This inlormation is exempt Irom disclosure under the Freedom ol Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under

other UK inlormation legislation. Reler disclosure requests to GCHQ on?
TOP SECRET STRAP1

TOP SECRET STRAP1

 

 

Access Control

 

 

Serial Access Given Full Name HRA Training ECI Cleared Role PF No.
YIN

e.g. Root/User Developer 11111

 

Innov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 7 Of 8

This inlormation is exempt Irom disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under other UK inlormation legislati

TOP SECRET STRAP1

TOP SECRET STRAP1

SEG Reviewers

Post
GCH Service Owner
NSA Service Owner
Innov8 Service Man er
Innov8 En ineeri
Innov8 Su rt Team echnical
Innov8 Corn Iiance Man er
Data Owner
Selector ement Team
ACD (Datafl ow)

8808 Representative

OPP-LEG

IT Services

IT Services Bude
Bude SSE

TFE-SSE

TPS

SAM Re resentative
Secu Workin Grou

 

Changes to Experiment Profile

 

Version Amendment Date Changes to the Experiment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Innov8 Experiment Profile Template V0.2 8 Of 8


TOP SECRET STRAP1

