 Is there "?fth party" collection? Round Table

Dynamic Page Highest Possible Classi?cation is
TOP SECRET SI TK REL TO USA, FVEY

Is there "?fth nartv" collection? 
-23 
CLASSIFICATION TOP TO USA, FVEY

"Fourth nartv collection" refers to passively or actively
obtaining data from some other actor's CNE activity against a target. Has
there ever been an instance of NSA obtaining information from Actor One
exploiting Actor Two's CNE activity against a target that NSA, Actor One,
and Actor Two all care about?

Edit: Awesome illustration per request:

asked 3 days ago



  

by 

Add A Comment Show 9 Comments (2 new) Show ALL Comment Blocks

2 Answers

_12
CLASSIFICATION TOP TO USA, FVEY

10f3

Is there "?fth party" collection? Round Table

Yes. There was a project that I was working last year with
regard to the South Korean CNE program. While we aren't super interested
in SK (things changed a bit when they started targeting us a bit more), we
were interested in North Korea and SK puts a lot of resources against them.
At that point, our access to NK was next to nothing but we were able to make
some inroads to the SK CNE program. We found a few instances where there
were NK of?cials with SK implants on their boxes, so we got on the ex?l
points, and sucked back the data. Thats fourth party. However,
some of the individuals that SK was targeting were also part of the NK CNE
program. So I guess that would be the ?fth party collect you were talking
about. But once that started happening, we ramped up efforts to target NK
ourselves (as you dont want to rely on an untrusted actor to do your work for
you). But some of the work that was done there was able to help us gain
access. I know of another instance (I will be more vague
because I believe there are more compartments involved and parts are
probably NF) where there was an actor we were going against. We realized
there was another actor that was also going against them and having great
success because of a 0 day they wrotepassive and
were able to re?purpose it. Big win. L) But they were all still
referred to as fourth party.

answered 2 days ago





 

Add A Comment Show 1 Comment (1 new)

6

CLASSIFICATION UNCLASSIFIED

C: UK TOP SECRET COMINT AUSCANUKUSNZ '4th
Party' was, of course, a COMINT (and particularly a term long
before it was a CNE one (or CNE even existed). In a COMINT context, ISTR
meeting a '5th Party' scenario from '70s: GCHQ station collected cipher on
nation A's internal security comms. Broken cipher revealed collect (including
cipher texts) by A's SIGINT against neighbouring nation B's internal security
comms (so that was '4th Party'). Some of B's texts so obtained revealed intel
derived from B's domestic intercept targets, so I guess that was '5th Party' ..
answered 1 day ago

TO USA, FVEY

(Unknown?GCHQ)

  

Add A Comment
Know anyone who can answer?
Share this:

 

20f3

Is there "?fth party" collection? Round Table

Your Answer

Answer:

 

 

(Don't forget to include portion markings as needed.)
For formatting tips, see this guide.
Classi?cation Marking (required):

Overall: 3 Submit

Topics:
?fth party collection
fourth party collection

Round Table Design: Round Table team, 831315, 

Content Steward and Paie Publisher: Round Table Team,

Derived from: Manual 1?52, Dated: 8January 2007
Declassify on: 20320108

Dynamic Page Highest Possible Classi?cation is
TOP SECRET SI TK REL TO USA, FVEY

30f3

