SIDToday - Expanding Endpoint Operations

DYNAMIC PAGE - HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U//FOUO) Expanding Endpoint Operations

FROM: COL	USA

Deputy Chief, Remote Operations Center (S321)

Run Date: 09/17/2004

(S//SI) Endpoint operations actively subvert systems that create, store, or manage
information — computers, peripherals, and telephone switches -- in order to directly
retrieve data of intelligence value or achieve other operational ends. Tailored

1 of 3

SIDToday - Expanding Endpoint Operations

Access Operations (TAO) develops and employs technologies and techniques for
endpoint operations.

(S)	Endpoint operations have resulted in reporting from all SID Product Lines and
regularly assists SIGINT development, midpoint collection, and cryptanalysis and
exploitation efforts. Endpoint collection also directly supports CIA and JSOC*
counter-terrorism operations.

(U//FOUO) TAO is expanding endpoint operations: increasing the number and
diversity of targets and building a more scalable and robust endpoint operations
infrastructure. A part of this expansion is the acquisition of a new endpoint
access remote operations center (ROC) that is capable of managing and
conducting endpoint operations on a scale that will dramatically expand collection
available to our internal and external customers.

(S//SI) This new ROC facility is scheduled to begin coming on line in the summer of
2005. It will be located on the 3rd floor of the R&E Building. As well as the growth
reflected in the table below, this expansion will provide a main operations floor, a
Technology Demonstration Center, and a training facility. The main operations floor
and operations break-out rooms are used to conduct initial exploitation operations
and sustained collection that involves human command and control of the
operation.

Current ROC	-	ROC 2005 J
5	Operations Break-out Rooms	13
2	Operations Teaming Areas	5
51	Server Racks	170
120	Personnel	215
17,000	Usable Square Feet	40,000+

(S//SI) Building the operations floor and increasing the number of break-out rooms
will enable us to grow from the current average of 20-25 of these operations per
day to over 100 per day and will facilitate the integration of NSA/CSS computer
network operations and real-time customer support. Sustained collection involving
automated implants pushing collected data from targets to the ROC as well as
voice and geolocation collection are managed from the Operations Teaming Areas.
The increased capacity in this area will support a growth from managing an
average of 100-150 active implants today to simultaneously managing thousands of
implanted targets. The increased personnel capacity will support this net growth in
operations tempo and will allow the integration of TAO's Requirements & Targeting
Division alongside the ROC's operators in order to better synchronize target
development and efficiently plan and execute endpoint operations.

(S//SI) The new ROC is but one facet of a much broader endpoint access expansion
program. Other elements include exporting endpoint access operations to the
RSOCs, dramatic improvements in automation, entirely new classes of hardware
and software implants, more modular and standardized tool designs, and robust
technology sharing and coordinated development with our First and Second Party
partners. Overall growth of endpoint operations depends on the synergy of all these
elements to balance endpoint target development capabilities, mission

SIDToday - Expanding Endpoint Operations

management processes, and. efficient flow of collected data to production
organizations.

*(U) Notes:

JSOC = Joint Special Operations Command

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday
articles may not be
republished or
reposted outside

NSANet without the
consent of SO 121

DYNAMIC PAGE -
HIGHEST POSSIBLE
CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK
// RELTO USA AUS
CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM:
NSA/CSSM 1-52,
DATED 08 JAN 2007
DECLASSIFY ON:
20320108