SIDToday - Interview with a SID "Hacker" -- Part 1: How Does TAO Do Its Work?

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET SI TK REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

Interview with a SID "Hacker" -- Part 1: How Does TAO Do Its
Work?

FROM: - the SIDtoday Editor

Run Date: 07/12/2012

 

One organization that has grown substantially in recent years
is Tailored Access Operations (832), the group that hacks our targets'

lof4

SIDToday - Interview with a SID "Hacker" -- Part 1: How Does TAO Do Its Work?

computers. (pictured), a counterterrorism subject-
matter expert in TAO's Requirements and Targeting organization,
spoke with SIDtoday recently to explain how TAO carries out its work:

 

 

1. What do TAO Requirements 6: Targeting like
you do? -- What's your role?

(U) Our role in is to serve as a liaison with the TOPIs in 82. We work with the
TOPIs to ?nd out what they really want in terms of CNE [computer-network
exploitation] collection and then work within TAO to ?gure out how to get To
give you a quick overview, there are different elements in TAO:

- First there are are the developers who create the software and
the hardware -- the tools that TAO uses to carry out our collection.

- Next are the operators in the ROC [Remote Operations Center]
who actually use the tools. They do the actual collection of intelligence from
the targets' systems, while showing good OPSEC [operations security] and
making sure our tools themselves are protected.

0 And then there is my element, Requirements and Targeting. We are
the and planners for operations. We ?nd out what the TOPIs are
looking for, do the network analysis, and draw up a plan for getting that
collection.

0 Supporting it all are the folks who provide the infrastructure. They
provide the computers, networks, etc. and keep everything running.

Each group brings a different skill to the table. Regarding the tools we
use, the developers know the coding for them, the operators know how to use
them, and just knows that they exist. focus is on where we can
apply the tools to get the intelligence we want.

In TAO, we all have to work hand-in-glove. Often the are eager
to grab whatever intelligence we can, while the operators are more conscious of
the risks involved, so we meet somewhere in between. Each side brings their own
perspective and it creates checks and balances.

The ROC does after-action reviews of operations -- every action taken is
automatically recorded -- to make sure things were done appropriately. Operators
have to be certi?ed -- and they can have their certi?cations pulled -- so they have a
strong incentive to show good OPSEC.

2. Do participate when operations are
carried out in the If so, how does it play out?

Yes, the actually sit side-by-side with the ROC operators
when an operation takes place. We're there to provide knowledge of the
networks, and the operators, as I mentioned, know how to use the tools to
extract the data.

Nowadays there are dedicated and operators working on

2of4

SIDToday - Interview with a SID "Hacker" -- Part 1: How Does TAO Do Its Work?

speci?c targets. So, for example, I work the CT [counterterrorism] target, and we
have counterpart operators who focus on CT, too. (In the past, we would
have shown up for an operation and been assigned an operator randomly out of a
pool.) The bene?t of this new approach is that the and operators can
develop working relationships and collaborate ahead of time on an upcoming
operation.

In terms of how an operation is scheduled, our decide to work
a project and start to do research on targets to go after. Next we get approvals
through the ROC mission directors to pursue operations against those targets. The
mission directors are a small group of people with lots of experience. They assess
the risks involved in the operation and approve or deny it. Once we have the
approval, the plan an operation in coordination with an operator and,
when they are ready, arrange a speci?c time to carry it out. We have the ?exibility
to conduct the operation at the optimal time.

In the early days TAO used to be just a bunch of hackers! We did things
in a more ad hoc one guy did it all. Now we're more systematic in how we
do things.

In the CT world, we usually go after the infrastructure (like an ISP
[internet service provider]) or after the speci?c target in end-point collection --
extracting data from a speci?c "box" [computer or device]. Normally collection is
automated for end-point, but sometimes it's an interactive, real-time event when
the target is up on the net. The latter happens quite a bit in CT. The operations
might take place at 2AM or 6AM, since that is when the target is active. Some CT
targets use really slow dial-up connections from remote places in the Pakistani
tribal areas, and we have to move quickly when the opportunity presents itself.

 

(U) you need linguists to participate in your operations, to
translate the names of the ?les, etc?

Not as much as you might think. We don't evaluate the content of the
data, we just collect it. Usually we have an idea of what types of ?les and
information the TOPIs are interested in -- like text ?les -- and we try to grab all of it
for analysis later. We don't take the time during the operation to sort out the good
from the bad.

(U) Stand by for the conclusion of this interview, appearing tomorrow. [Editor's
note: click 

SIDtoday
articles may not be
republished or
reposted outside

30f4

SIDToday - Interview with a SID "Hacker" -- Part 1: How Does TAO Do Its Work?

without the
consent of 50121

 

DYNAMIC PAGE 
HIGHEST POSSIBLE
CLASSIFICATION IS

TOP SECRET SI TK
REL TO USA AUS
CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM:
1?52,
DATED 08 JAN 2007
DECLASSIFY ON:
20320108

4of4

