 SEC: 

PRECIS

l-lr. Dietmar 

Director Analysis and Production
German Federal lntelligence Service 
April 1 May 2013

SID DIR Counesy Call: 30 April 2013, 1100 - 1130

Panici ants: l'vlr. SUSLDL Desi nee; l'vlr. l'vlr.
I'vlr. Chief sso; l'vis. susmo

Designee; l'vls. CDD Germany

BA. UND:

I USA, l-lr. assumed his current position in
2011 and is marking his second visit to NSA. He is rumored to be under consideration to
become the nest Director, succeeding MC. l-lanmut 13- He will be
accompanied by l-lr. 1|At'ilfried P-Director Collection, and the following
END leadership:

l-lr. Andreas l-I-Director, END Cyber Defense Center
Chief, Tasking and Customer Relations
END Liaison Officer, Washington, DC.

PURPDSE BE THE VISIT:

- USA, Discussions duting the third Strategic Planning Conference
will focus on topics of mutual interest and future areas of collaboration. 1|With
encouragement, the Eetmans are coming prepared to de?ne speci?c capabilities
in potential new areas of analytic and Computer Network Defense collaboration.
This SPC will present an opportunityr for leadership to assess the 
conttibutions and reiterate their commitment to the EE'lTl'lEll'l partnership. DlR?s
discussions will set the tone for a ptoductive conference.

to} warm: a EQUESTED:
- USA, The END is eager to present its cagabilities and

sate Eh the threats hf? and with the anal

of expanding the pannership. Their delegation includes several who are
prepared to engage NSA leadership in identifying areas of mutual cooperation. The END
also is prepared to discuss ptogress of the new END CyberDefense Center and the
policies and authorities governing the mission, while seeking lessons learned from NSA.

NSAICSS REQUESTED: Status of END-NBA bilateral initiatives,
highlighting:

I identify mutual intelligence gaps on? and-target



SEC: 

TCIP CIF URN

Enhanced CT analytic and technical cooperation with END and Ef?v' [Federal
Office forthe Protection of the Constitution] given the fotmalization of the 
pannership in March 2013.

Discussion of Getman policiesx?authorities of the new END Cyber Defense Center and
collaboration with the defensive mission; NTDC will brief TUTELAGE

Status of_ and Special Source access ptograms

Getmani?s sugyort to Coalition . and continued support

1n forthe Counter-lED mission and global threat.

CYEEREDM REQUESTED: MIA.

THREADS: USA, 

NSA welcomes the eagemess to strengthen and expand cooperation with NSA

investing in technical expertise to support the Ef?v' and other German services
could bolster Germany?s effectiveness against tertotism and cyber threats

to} KEY TDPICS

TD USA, Thank l-lr. for the close partnership that NSA enjoys
with the END

[SifSlx?iREL TD USA, Enhancing the technical and analytical capabilities of our
Getman intelligence panners will better-equip Getmany to counter ten?orists; 
desire to panner closely with both END and Ef?v'

WREL TD USA, willingness to explore new areas of cooperation
that fill mutual intelligence gaps

ELE'itr TAKEAWAYS:

1. TD USA, Exp?ding the Scope of Bilateral Cooperation: Duting
recent meetings with END leadershi DIRNSA, and SID encouraged the END to
define specific capabilities on and-for
discussion at the SPC. Thank the END forcoming so well prepared to discuss its potential
conttibution in these area and to give NSA the opponunity to evaluate where a formal
bilateral pannership at the TSx?fSl level has the most ptomise.

2. TD USA, Connterterrorism: Share that NSA received 
approval in Match 2013 to establish a formal CT relationship with the HIV and anticipates
increasing synergy against the target with collaboration; NSA also has
signed the Terms of Reference to provision XKE technology to the Ef?v'. Thank the
END for its leadership in providing technical solutionsx?support to the Ef'v'.

3. TD USA, Computer Network Defense: Commend Getmany for
establishing the END Cyber Defense Center in Berlin and the National Cyber Defense

Centre in Bonn. Encourage Ef'v'xr [information Assurance Setvice] collaboration to

leverage support to CND. Share that NSA is eagerto leam more about German
cyber authorities and is prepared to offer lessons learned and technical presentations,
including TUTELAGE, to aid in the development of German support to CND.

TCIP CIF URN

SEE: 

4. A- i 

Special Source access programs.

 

- USA. END Collaboration with Special Source
Dperations Thank the END for their
assistance with the trilateral program. acknowledging recent delays due to funding
constraints by both panners. Reassure that the END is the plogram lead with NSA
playing a technical support role. or background only, VE has been
identi?ed for possible termination due to fiscal constraints, bat the partners have not
been informed.

S. USA. Middle East S: Africa: Thank the END for providing West
African-language assistance used by high-level-officials; State that NSA is
looking forward to leaming more about the capabilities in?

E3. USA. AFSC: Commend the Gemians for their suppon and
leadership in RC-North Multinational Cell and their effons to contribute to Division
-of-Effon Reporting on governance tatgets. Explain that Gemian support in?
will be critical in maintaining necessary threat waming and force protection in 2013.314 as
MES becomes a logistical hub and potential egress route into_ Regarding the
post-Ellie?l disposition of US. forces, state that the coalition partners will discuss this topic at
the early May 2U13AFSC conference in Denmark.

T. USA. Counter-1RD: Thank the END for supporting the Counter-
IED mission in RC-North and for engaging the Seniors Eulo 
venues. NSA looks forward to continued cooperation in the postd 2014
envilonment on a global basis.

S. USA. NSA Mannin at Ead Aiblin Post-Summer 2013: At the
request in January 2013. SID re-evaluated the technical presence at SUSLAG.
Convey that NSA has difficult choices to make in this challenging fiscal climate and will
continue to keep the request for consideration. Reference the availability of VTC. the
Eulopean Technical Center and the CHATTERII communications tool to provide

assistance.

 

VISIT FDRMAT:
- To USA. DEU The END will provide briefings [tri?
and as well as on Gemiany?s posnire on CND.
I USA. NSA Participants: SID DIR. 
ADD-?Acquisition; GCM South Asia; GCM International Crime Sr Narcotics;

 
 

SEE: 

TCIP SEC CIF URN

GCM Middle East Sr. Africa; International Security Issues; Chief
DfCl-l 

to} Paevrous AND aeseecrrve TDPICS: E-fir?st visited NSA in
December 2011 for familiarization with mission and discussions with SID leadership.

PDTENT 

I SKYPE: The Germans may bring up the subject of SRYPE. 
response has been that it has had some success working SRYPE via tailored access at the
end point by gaining access to one or more of the computers involved in the session.
When I-lr. Klaus-Fritsche (State Secretary, Germany Ministry of Interior] sought 
assistance with intercepting SRYPE transmissions during a 10 January 2012 meeting
with DIRN SA, DIRNSA suggested the DN1 Representative Eerlin take the lead in
arranging an exchange to include CIA, and NSA. Should the partner raise this issue
again, recommend that NSA once again redirects them to and CIA.

EITHER 
- (srmei EIDs: E_Elr1t2l 1-
Point Papers: S2A, S2E, S2G, S21, SS, and 

(orrFoLr o] Poc: coo ny, 

TCIP SEC CIF URN

