TOP SECRET STRAP1

9 March 2011	DISCOVER ID 5100181

E. MILKWHITE Enrichment Service (MES) Programme

In FY11/12 the MES Programme will continue to support the Home Office
Communications Capabilities Directorate (CCD), whose programme is tasked with
modernising the UK’s domestic interception capabilities. The CCD SR10 settlement
includes funding to sustain CCD mitigation projects that deliver early benefits during
years 1-2 of the funding period. MES sustainment is one key component of this
portfolio:

•	External funding deferred from 2010/11 will enable GCHQ to deliver
advanced analytics, mobile convergence and to scale the MES Advanced
Service

•	External sustainment funding will enable GCHQ to deliver post and continuing
design services (PDS/CDS); to maintain the MES-funded access and bulk
events storage; and to tailor the advanced analytics capability to keep pace
with short term changes in the communications environment.

GCHQ’s separate SR10 sustainment settlement does not contain parallel funding to
sustain MES access and processing.

Customer Diversity (collaborative working)

The MES Standard Service has been TTO’d to the five intercepting law enforcement
agencies2 via the SOCA-hosted, multi-agency Internet Data Unit (iDU) and to BSS
via the A8 Digint Identification Team (DIT). SOCA and HMRC also receive the MES
Advanced Service via established ‘business as usual’ channels. During 2011/12 the
standard service will be extended to SIS and the advanced service will be tailored to
meet BSS and SIS requirements.

Service Capacity

During 2011/12, service capacity will grow to keep pace with increasing customer
demand, up to the agreed service level agreements for each agency. The BSS
Standard and SOCA/HMRC Advanced services are expected to have reached their
planned capacity by 31st March 2011 and this will be sustained through SR10. As
new services are established their capacity will be grown to match planned SLA’s in
line with actual customer demand.

SOCA, HMRC, MPS (CTC), PSNI, Scottish Recording Centre.

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on

TOP SECRET STRAP 1

TOP SECRET STRAP1

9 March 2011	DISCOVER ID 5100181

Service Productivity

GCHQ will continue to monitor the productivity per request (% of identifiers enriched
and diversity of enrichment) to ensure that the underlying analytic capabilities and
tools keep pace with the changing communications environment.

Enabling Business Change

Rapid changes in technology and target communications behaviours are driving our
customers to adopt new ways of working with Internet data. Implementing these new
services is enabling the community to identify and overcome many of the
operational, cultural and policy challenges associated with this transformation, and
GCHQ will continue to be forward leaning in supporting the CCD change agenda.

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be subject to exemption under
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on

TOP SECRET STRAP 1