TOP 10524
DRAFT

(S) National Security Agency/Central Security

Service

(N SS)

and
US. Strategic Command
Joint Functional Component Command Network

Warfare

(JFCC-N W)

National Initiative
Protection Program Sentry Eagle

Nation] lulu-the SSNC SS Core Seems

Derived From: 1-52
Dated: 20041 123
Declassify On: 20310524
TOP 10524

 

 

TOP 10524
DRAFT

(S) National Initiative Brief Sheet

. You are being indoctrinated on SENTRY EAGLE, the and
compartrnented program protecting the highest and most
sensitive level of information related to and support
to the U.S. Government's efforts to protect America?s cyberspace. America?s
cyberspace is the combination of U.S. National Security Systems, Military
Systems, Intelligence Systems, Federal Government Systems, Critical
Infrastructure Systems and all other U.S. systems (private industry, academia
and private citizen.)

. effort to protect America?s cyberspace encompasses the
combination of all abilities to detect nation and non-nation attacks on U.S.
cyberspace via active and passive SIGINT and Information Assurance means.
JFCC-NW's effort to protect America?s cyberspace encompasses the efforts to
plan, and when tasked, attack an adversary?s cyber space via
Computer Network Attack. The combination of these two e?'orts constitutes
and Core Computer Network Operations (CNO)
Secrets.

. In order for and JFCC-NW to accomplish, along with
other U.S. and foreign government agencies/elements, the protection of
America?s cyberspace, must combine the full capabilities of
authorized Computer Network Operations capabilities (SIGTNT, Computer
Network Exploitation Information Assurance, Computer Network
Defense (CND), and Network Warfare, Computer Network Attack 
and all supporting activities.

. SENTRY EAGLE and its subordinate programs protect the
combined facts related to and abilities to conduct
CNO operations. It encompasses the most sensitive aspects of 
relationships with industry (U.S. and foreign) and the U.S. lnforrnation
Operations/CNO community; ability to exploit cnciphered communications;
ability to conduct CN ability to conduct and, relationships with
Human Intelligence (HU MINT) Agencies.

. These and JFCC-NW Core CNO Secrets are being
provided to you based upon your ?need to know" as determined by the
Director, NSA/Chief, Central Security Service and Commander, JFCC-NW.
While many of the facts in this brie?ng are contained in separate 
Exceptionally Controlled Information (ECIs) or DOD Special Access
Programs (SAPS) structures, no other program combines the totality of all
these facts into one overarching program. The facts contained in this program
constitute a combination of the greatest number of highly sensitive facts
related to overall mission. As such, depending upon

TOP 10524
DRAFT

 

 

TOP 10524
DRAFT

your mission necd-to-know or management position, you may be read on for
one, a combination of two or more, or all aspects of SENTRY EAGLE.

. Individuals briefed into SENTRY EAGLE may not share
information regarding this program with those not read into this program, or
with foreign nationals, including those with whom has Second and
Third Party relationships. Depending upon a speci?c fact, you may share
such a fact with foreign partners as noted on the SENTRY EAGLE or
subordinate classi?cation guides as paragraph marked or within specific
SAP or ECI channels. Under no circumstances will you share the
totality of SENTRY EAGLE nor facts that are marked NOFORN.

. (S) SENTRY EAGLE material must be protected within this compartment and
discussed only with cleared personnel on a need-tooknow basis. Disclosure of
SENTRY EAGLE information to non-indoctrinated personnel may result in
disciplinary action to include criminal prosecution. When sharing SENTRY
EAGLE compartrnented information, it will be protected with when
transmitted via electronic means or with sealed, by name envelopes when
transmitted via hard copy.

TOP 10524
DRAFT

 

TOP 
DRAFT

(U) SENTRY EAGLE DATA SHEET
COVERNAME: SENTRY EAGLE
TRIGRAPH: SEE

CONTROL AUTHORITY CONTACT INFORMATION:

Name: 
Org:?
Phone 
E-maik 

Name: 
Org:?
Phone 
E-mail: 

(U) INFORMATION REQUIRING SENTRY EAGLE PROTECTION:

Details related to the combination and abilities
to conduct CNO in the defense of America?s cyberspace.

(U) VALUE OF SEE:

Protecting sensitive industrial and human intelligence
relationships; SIGINT exploitation of adversary computers and computer networks and
infrastructure and their use of encipherment; Information Assurance defense of U.S.
Government National Security Systems; and, Computer Network Attack
mission capabilities.

(U) JUSTIFICATION FOR SENTRY EAGLE PROTECTION:

Unauthorized disclosure of relationships with industry (U .S. and
foreign) and the U.S. Information Operations/CNO community; ability to exploit
enciphered communications; ability to conduct ability to conduct and,
relationships with Human Intelligence (HUMIN T) Agencies will cause exceptionally
grave damage to U.S. national security. The loss of this information could critically
compromise highly sensitive U.S. and foreign relationships, multi-year past
and future NSA investments, and the ability to exploit foreign adversary cyberspace
while protecting U.S cyberspace.

TOP 
APT

 

TOP 10524
DRAFT

(U) LINKAGE TO OTHER and JFCC-NW PROGRAMS (ECI or SAP):

(C) This overarching compartmented program is related to the following ECIs (list all the
ECls SPARECHANGE, WHIPGENIE, AUNTIE, AMBULANT, OPALESCE,
REVELRY, REFRACTOR) and SAPS (list all the SAPs by name only).

(C) SENTRY EAGLE is an umbrella ECI program that includes facts currently contained
in other E05 and separate SENTRY EAGLE ECI facts.

(C) SENTRY EAGLE contains sub-compartments: SENTRY HAWK, SENTRY
FALCON, SENTRY OSPREY, SENTRY RAVEN, SENTRY CONDOR, AND
SENTRY OWL.

(U) SENTRY EAGLE BE SHARED WITH FOREIGN 

The entirety of SENTRY EAGLE will not be shared with any foreign parties.
However, subcomponents of SENTRY EAGLE, constituting various facts already shared
with or 3rd parties, may be shared, but only within existing ECIs. See
speci?c ECI Security Of?cers for more information on sharing with foreign partners.

TOP 10524
DRAFT

 

 

TOP 10524
DRAFT

What follows is a listing of and JFCC-NW generalized facts
related to sensitive intelligence and defense or network warfare methods,
relationships and activities that are currently protected as noted. Many of these
facts, to include detailed information, are contained in separate special access
progams under auspices many under Exceptionally Controlled
Information (ECIS) or Special Access Progarns (SAPS).

(S) The protection of Intelligence sources, methods and activities relate to the
following: Source Person, place or thing from which intelligence is gathered;
Method means by which collection, processing, and dissemination takes place;
Activity intelligence operation that may employ one or more source or method
and the degree of success for said operation.

Depending upon your mission need-to-know, you will be read on for one
or more of these generalized fact sets. Speci?c detailed facts for a generalized
fact will remain within one or more ECIS as noted.

(U) Facts, as color coded, are as follows:

a. (U) Green color: Unclassi?ed facts that may be released to the public
at the unclassi?ed level. Only or JFCC-NW Public Affairs
of?cers may release this infomnation.

b. Blue color: Unclassi?ed but for Of?cial Use Only
(F OUO) facts that may be released by any or JFCC-NW
government of?cial to another U.S. Government, U.S. Industry, U.S.
Academic or selected foreign governments, as authorized.

c. Red color: Con?dential, Secret or Top Secret, to include
Special (SCI), that may be released by
any SS and JF CC -NW government o?'ncial to another properly
cleared and indoctrinated U.S. Government of?cial or as authorized to
a foreign government on need to know basis.

d. Black color: Top Secret, NATIONAL
EAGLE progam information that MAY NOT
BE RELEASED OUTSIDE OF except to a limited number
of selected U.S. Government officials and ONLY WITH THE
APPROVAL OF JFCC-NW OR THE
NATIONAL INITIATIVE PROGRAM SECURITY OFFICER
These facts, in part or as a whole, constitute many of and
most highly sensitive or network warfare
facts related to intelligence sources, methods, and activities and
relationships; or CNA operational capabilities, thus necessitating
extraordinary protection.

TOP 10524
DRAFT

TOP 10524
DRAFT

(U) and its Relationships with Industry within the National Imitative -
ECI Sentry Owl - SOL

(U) Fact that must keep abreast of current trends and technology related to
communications and information technology.
(U) Fact that works with foreign partners as a part of its missions.

(UHFOUO) Fact that works with U.S. industry in the conduct of its 
missions.

Fact the works with U.S. industry as technical advisers regarding
products.

Fact that SS conducts SIGINT enabling programs and related operations
with U.S. industry.

Fact that SS conducts SIGINT enabling programs and related operations
with U.S. HUMINT Agencies and other U.S. government elements.

Fact that has Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA)
operations with U.S. commercial industry elements.

(Tst'Sl) Fact that SS conducts SIGINT enabling programs and related operations
with foreign partners.

SOL) Fact that works with and has contractual relationships with
Speci?c named U.S. commercial entities to conduct SIGINT enabling programs
and operations.

ECI SOL) Fact that works with speci?c named U.S. commercial
entities and operational details (devices/products) to make them exploitable for
SIGINT.

ECI SOL) Fact that works with speci?c foreign partrners and
foreign commercial industry entities and operational details (devices/products)
to make them exploitable for SIGINT.

SOL) Facts related to NSA personnel (under cover), operational meetings,
speci?c operations, Speci?c technology, Speci?c locations and covert communications
related to SIGINT enabling with Speci?c commercial entities 

SOL) Facts related to working with U.S. commercial entities on
the acquisition of communications (content and metadata) provided by the U.S. service
provider to worldwide customers; communications transiting the or access to
international communications (cable, satellite, etc.) mediums provided by the U.S. entity.
ECI SOL) Facts that iderntify a U.S. or foreign commercial platform conducting
SIGINT operations, or human asset cooperating with 

TOP 10524
DRAFT

 

TOP 10524
DRAFT

(U) and its Relationships to Information Operations/Computer
Network Operations with the National Initiative ECI Sentry Condor - SCR.

(U) Fact that provides support to Information Operations (IO).
(U) Fact that provides SIGINT and Computer Network Defense (CND)
information in support of Computer Network Attack (CNA).

Fact that provides technical SIGINT and Information
Assurance datafnnformation in support of CNO

Fact that provides SIGINT that supports the planning,
and employment of CNA combat capabilities

Fact that hosts (Speci?c DOD named units and organizations)
CNA activities within its SIGINT CN structure.

SCR) Fact that provides specific target related technical
and operational material tools and techniques that allows
the employment of U.S. national and tactical speci?c computer network attack
mechanisms.

TOP 10524
DRAFT

 

TOP 1 05 24
DRAFT

(U) and Exploitation of Enciphered Communications with the
National Imitative - ECI Sentry Raven - SRN

(U) Fact that exploits foreign ciphers.

Fact that SS works with the in the exploitation
of foreign ciphers.

Intelligence derived from the exploitation of foreign ciphers without
revealing the underlying foreign cipher (manual or machine) or techniques used to
exploit.

SRN) Facts that reveal speci?c weakness or 
used to achieve success against a foreign cipher.
SRN) Facts related to Super Computers/Special Purpose 
hardware, software and speci?c programmatic funding resources used to achieve
success against foreign ciphers.

ECI SRN) Fact that works with speci?c U.S. commercial entities
to modify U.S. nnanufactured systems to make them exploitable
for SIGINT.

SRN) Fact that is investing hundreds of millions of
dollars in high-powered and special purpose computer systems to attack (speci?cally
commercial 

TOP 10524
DRAFT

 

TOP 10524
DRAFT

(U) and Computer Network Exploitation with the National Initiative -
ECI Sentry Hawk - SHK

(U) Fact the conducts Computer Network Exploitation (CN E)
(U) Fact that works with the CIA and FBI.

Fact that works with CIA and FBI on SIGINT related
missions.

(SKISI) Fact that works with CIA and FBI related to ?close access or
remote access" CNE operations.

Fact that conducts SIGINT operations against computers, computer
peripherals, computer-controlled devices, computer networks or facilities that house
them, using publicly available access Public Switched Networks, Internet, etc.).
Facts related to adversary vulnerabilities to CNA.

Facts related to adversary planning or operations.?

SHK) Fact that is attempting to exploit or has succeeded in
exploiting a speci?c vulnerability ?rewall, operating system, software
application etc.), a speci?c entity or facility within a target?s l'l'lcomputer structure.
(TS/lSl/l ECI SHK) Facts related to the exact timing, location, participants, off-net or
on-net operations (including cover/covert presence on the internet), CN command,
control and data ex?ltration tools/capabilities arnd locations, used to exploit or
maintain irntrusivc access to a target?s IT/computer structure.

SHK) Fact that works with U.S. and foreign conunereial
entities in the conduct of CNE.

SHK) Facts related to the description of U.S. hardware or software
implant and location (speci?c organization and Internet Protocol Device/Address) of
such on a target?s IT/communications system.

SHK) Facts related to access to non-U.S. worldwide
cable/?ber optic structures regardless of platform access or agreements with foreign
entities.

(Note: All attempts will be made to protect the ?source? of the NE
information lest an adversary determine how NSA acquired the planning
and operations. In all cases, maximum protection will be granted to the SIGINT
?method? and ?activity? used to acquire the NE information).

TOP 10524
DRAFT

 

 

TOP 10524

DRAFT
(U) and Computer Network Defense with the National Imitative - ECI
Sentry Falcon - SFN

(U) The fact that conducts Computer Network Defense (CND)
(U) Facts related to general, open source reporting on types of generic vulnerabilities
(vimses, trojan horses, etc.)

Facts related to deployment of CND structures to detect and
report on anomalous activities.

General facts related to Joint COMSEC Monitoring
Activities (ICMA), Red Team and Blue Team.

Facts related to US. victim vulnerabilities and victim exploitation when
uncovered via Bluesash.

(CJNF) Facts related to JCMA results as provided to a supported
command?.

(S) Facts related to adversary CNE and CNA capabilities. intentions and activities
(without attribution to intelligence sources or methods")

(S) Facts related to deployment of CND structures Bluesash) to
detect hostile (state or non-state sponsored) CN activities at U.S. NIPRNET
gateways.

(S) CND response action operations.

(S) Facts related to NSAICSS's Joint COMSEC Monitoring Activities (JCMA). Red
Team. Blue Team rcsuIts*?*.

(SUSI) Facts related to adversary CNE and CNA activity attribution. 

(SUSI) Facts related to US. victim vulnerabilities and victim exploitation when
uncovered via SIGINT sources and methods.

Facts related to U.S. victim vulnerabilities and victim exploitation. 

ECI SFN) Facts related to activities to determine intruder
attribution including sensitive counter-intelligence investigations and sensitive honey-
pot, watermarking, data-tagging activities.

SFN) Facts related to speci?c operations to deceive network
users.

SFN) Facts related to speci?c activities to redirect network
data.

Classi?ed at a minimum F. May be classi?ed higher based upon results.

Note: The only way to accomplish this outside of SCI. but still classified.
channels may necessitate the use of a U.S. Govemment Department of
Homeland Security) ?cut-out" to transmit such information to U.S. Government.
State. Local and Tribal entities. as well as foreign govemments. The preference will
be to use a non-U.S. Intelligence Community entity.

(S) Results may be Secret NOFORN.

TOP 10524
DRAFT

 

 

 

TOP 10524
DRAFT

TOP 10524
DRAFT

 

TOP 10524
DRAFT

(U) and its Relationship with Human Intelligence (HUMINT) Agencies
with the National Initiative - ECI Sentry Osprey - SOY

(U) Fact that works with the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the
Defense Human Intelligence via the National Clandestine Service (N CS).

Fact that works with the NCS for the collection of high
priority target internal foreign communications.

Fact that employs its own assets (Target Exploitation -
TAREX) to support SIGINT operations.

SOY) Facts related to targetsftarget countries that
employ NCS capabilities.

SOY) Facts related to the identity of NCS human assets/agents
(covert or under cover), speci?c targets/target countries, speci?c locations! sites
(citicstT site) and speci?c operations and techniques (cquipments!supply chain or
other) used to exploit targets.

TOP 10524
DRAFT

 

