 Starting Up a New Mission at the European Security
Operations Center: End-to-End SIGINT



Intelligence Analysis Intern
Run Date: IEIDEIEDDT

When considering possible TDY and deployment locations, many of my
Intelligence Analysis Development Program colleagues have opted for Iraq,

lofd

Afghanistan, or an site. At least for now, I chose to avoid the heat and sand and
took advantage of a different opportunity for my fourth IADP tour. From
May-September EDDT, I completed a TDY from Ft. Meade to the European Security
Operations Center in Darmstadt, Germany.

The ESDC

ESDG, which stood up in April EDEN-I [see some baclroround}, is ajoint
Ar'myi'NSA SIGINT operations center and serves as the SEIAnalysis 8: Production
arm Europe ESDG's personnel mi): consists of 1D5th MI
Battalion soldiers, a small Marine detachment, contractors, Department of the
Army civilians, and NSA civilians in Darmstadt and Stuttgart in Germany as well as
in Molesworth, England, and Mons, Belgium. ESDG's missions include African
Regional Targets, North African and European Counter-Terrorism missions, Force
Protectioanndications 8: Warning, and theatre 

 

During my tour, I was assigned to the Africa Division and provided
ESDG with target development support for the Gulfof Guinea Hydrocarbon
Security mission, consisting primarily ofNigerian and Angolan targets. My
particular focus was to launch the Africa Division's energy security mission
covering Angola.

Working African missions often present unique challenges, and both
the Nigerian and Angolan energy sectors were certainly no different. While ESDG
had worked the Nigerian energy security mission for over two years, due to
resource constraints, relatively little development work had been done against the
Angolan target. The larger Gulf oquinea Hydrocarbon mission consisted of
several a branch manager, and a technical leader, but it was largely up to
me to do the bottom-up target development work in building the Angola mission.

The Gul'foquinen and surrounding region

The task was somewhat daunting. Angola's state-owned oil firm,
Sonangol, is a massive entity with its own airline, logistical service firms, and
importantly, its own telecommunications subsidiary. Sonangol partners with several
major Western and Chinese oil companies, and Chinese firms are heavily involved
in the telecommunications sector. Our collection was minimal, and our day-to-day
Angola team was essentially one deep: me.

We compiled a detailed assessment and established good baseline
knowledge ofour current SIGINT posture in Angola. We reviewed existing SGS
First Instance Reporting, and had several fruitful exchanges with SGS Luanda in
Angola. We also worked closely both with ESDG's in-house elements and
the European Technical Center to begin a target templating process and draft
collection requirements. Through collaboration with CIA and EUGGM Africa
Division's understanding of our customer and partner requirements improved
significantly.

In order to gain a SIGINT window into Angola's telecom sector and
energy industry, we chose to continue to chip away at Sonangol. Relying on skills
and contacts acquired in previous IADP tours, I conducted intensive SIGINT

inf-s

research on Sonangol seed selectors using chaining, metadata analysis, and
visualization tools such as Gmap and Renoir. My target development work spanned
both the DNI and DNR realms. We were able to identify and unlock Sonangol target
domains, locate and task e-mail selectors in QADEN GE, and identify several new
targets in the Angolan oil and telecommunications sectors.

A key part of my tour at ESGG was identifying new potential collection
accesses. Using open source, MEALE, ELAQKEEARL, NEE, BEAM, and
SURREY. I successfully located, identified, and submitted several new targets for
and SGS collection. Partnering with ESGG SGS, and 
collection staff at Ft. Meade and elsewhere, we were able to draft and submit the
first collection requirement for the Angola energy mission. By the end of my tour
ESGG had seen a significant increase in Angola energy traf?c. We also were able to
issue the first product of the Angola mission, ajointly issued report between the
Africa division and ESGG 

My tour at ESGG was an excellent exercise in end-to-end SIGINT to
include initial research and target development, collection access discovery and
tasking, and issuing products. My understanding ofthe SIGINT process improved
greatly during my time at ESGG. The recent stand-up of the LIE. African Command
co-located with EUGGM in Stuttgart, Germany is certain to create
even more opportunities for to support ESGG's missions in a dynamic
environment.

 

Notes:

EUGGM JAG the European Gommand Joint Analysis Center

?inf-i

Llof?

