SECRET STRAP1

18* August 2009

Business Benefit	How it will achieve this
	decommissioning.)  • Need to work out support arrangements for all this kit and the QFDs.
Enable the trial of new bulk analysis ideas and apply existing statistical methods in order to better understand data and develop analytical tools.	•	Permit users to access data directly on BLACK HOLE.  •	Provide processing resource for analytic trialling (part of the Capability Developer Workspace)
Enable new sources of data to be introduced quickly into existing QFDs.	• Introduce a standard agile process of adding new data sources to existing QFDs.
Enable users to understand the BLACK HOLE data to look for particular patterns and behaviours for target discovery	•	Permit users to access data directly on BLACK HOLE.  •	Allow users to perform minor processing on BLACK HOLE Management Server, or using processing resource.
Enable TR, GTAC and GTE access to more data for research purposes, which are not QFD related.	•	Permit users to extract BLACK HOLE data onto an external system.  •	Permit users to access data directly on BLACK HOLE.  •	Allow users to perform minor processing on BLACK HOLE Management Server.
Enable the easy pull-through of new versions of BLACK HOLE from TR.	•	Work with TR to keep the BLAZING SADDLES BLACK HOLE in step with the TR BLACK HOLE.  •	Carry out development drops to enhance BLACK HOLE capability when necessary.
Enable increased supportability of tools and infrastructure.	• Use of corporately supported processes and infrastructure, e.g. Analytics Agility Service (AAS).
Removal of support burden from TR staff, allowing them to concentrate on research, rather than support.	• Support is transferred from TR staff to First Line support, Second Line support and also Deep support (TDB).
Engineered future expandability to cope with new protocols or volume increases.	• Scope to expand is built into the NGE BLACK HOLE system design architecture.

Table 1 Business Benefits

4 Of 13

The information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on



under

SECRET STRAP1