SECRET STRAP1

18th August 2009

and will also help speed up the transfer of QFDs into the NGE environment.
(This template will be delivered with the help of TR, and agreed by all
stakeholders in QFD development. It will be lightweight.)

•	The time to transfer a new QFD into the NGE environment should be
approximately of the order of 1-2 weeks.

•	Resource effort to transfer new QFDs will come from TDB-Events.

•	The co-ordination effort between Operations trialling the new QFD will come
from the BLACK HOLE Manager (see BLACK HOLE Manager Role, page 12).
This also includes the establishment of a QFD lifecycle process to manage the
QFDs throughout its lifecycle on the NGE environment. (From Tech transfer to
decommissioning.)

34.	To enable future enhancements to the BLACK HOLE system it is expected that
TR and TDB-Events shall be committed to have a common development and
deployment platform.

35.	To feed an existing QFD or making a new QFD based around a new data source
of metadata that is available via MAILORDER the following is expected to occur:

i.	The Researcher1 contacts the data owner to obtain information about the
classification of the data and the likely volumes.

ii.	The Researcher contacts the BLACK HOLE Manager to negotiate an
’incoming’ directory.

iii.	The Researcher submits an RFC to DATAFLOW CAB to get a MAILORDER
feed of the data source into BLACK HOLE, referencing the BLACK HOLE
Manager and the agreed incoming directory.

iv.	The Researcher develops an ingest script that can be cron-jobbed by the
BLACK HOLE Manager to process the incoming data and place it in an
appropriate part of the main BLACK HOLE file system. A suitable case
notation is agreed.

v.	The Dataflow team liaises with the BLACK HOLE Manager to set up and test
the MAILORDER feed.

vi.	The Researcher is informed when the feed is established, and they can view
the statistics and status of their feed via the BLACK HOLE stats webpage.

vii.	The data either:

a.	Finds its way automatically into an existing QFD (by virtue of filenames
and locations on BLACK HOLE. Note: This may be QFD dependant
and may actually need a config change on the QFD’s loader.

or

b.	The researcher uses BLACKFIND and BLACKCAT to extract the data
to perfect their new QFD in experiment space.

36.	For sources that are not MAILORDER, the Researcher is encouraged to use
MAILORDER as this will allow control of the incoming data via a single managed
interface.

1 The Researcher role includes individuals from TR. GTE, CNE. etc.

8	Of 13

Thé information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Informato^c^OO^n^TTa^^ubiec^t^xemp^orMjrcer
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on

SECRET STRAP1