SECRET STRAP1

18th August 2009

46.	Access methods are described below:

1.	The main method for getting access to BLACK HOLE data, from both
Cheltenham and Bude will be via the new HTTP interface. This comprises
2 calls: BLACKFIND takes a list of criteria e.g. data type, date etc. and
returns a list of the files that meet the criteria. BLACKCAT takes the list of
files, and streams the data back to the user.

2.	As part of trialling new QFDs, data could be extracted from the BH storage
via NFS to the BLACK HOLE Management Server. This method of access
would need to be restricted, and not open for general access, as there is
no way to restrict access to the data. This method would be the same at
both Cheltenham and at Bude.

3.	To negate the need to transport data from Bude to Cheltenham, it may be
possible to perform analysis of the data at Bude. This would entail using
the HTTP interface detailed in 1.

4.	In the future, it may be possible to house some of the processing of BH
data on the ExDS. However, this not possible at present.

47.	Obviously the data extracted using method 1. has to go somewhere. It is
anticipated that extractions would either go onto the user’s own platform, or onto
one of the servers in the new AAS Experiment Environment.

Data usage scenarios:

48.	Bulk extraction for further analysis: It is envisaged that the vast majority of
analysis of the BLACK HOLE data will take place off of the BLACK HOLE
platform e.g. on one of the servers in the new AAS Experiment environment. To
extract data from the NGE BLACK HOLE, the user will utilise the BLACKFIND
and BLACKCAT procedures described above in method 1. This will enable the
user to stream a set of data back to their platform for further analysis. The
procedure will be valid for extracting data from both the Cheltenham and Bude
BLACK HOLE instances. The analysis platform would normally be housed at
Cheltenham. However, in the future it may be possible to provide analytic
platforms at Bude to reduce the amount of cross-site network traffic.

49.	Direct access to BLACK HOLE data: For the trialling of new QFDs, the BLACK
HOLE disk would be directly NFS mounted to the QFD platform (shown above as
the BLACK HOLE MGMT Server). Unfortunately, it will not be possible to NFS
mount BLACK HOLE disk directly to analytic platforms due to the large number of
security concerns that this approach raises. The majority of these concerns are
removed by the use of the new HTTP interface, as described above.

11 of 13

The information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and may be
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on



under

SECRET STRAP1