SECRET STRAP1

18th August 2009

•	To test existing QFDs with new data feeds deployed to BLACK HOLE
Management Server or equivalent (See Figure 2 - NGE BLACK HOLE Data

Access).

•	To help upgrade/enhance the BLACK HOLE instance itself.

•	To use the BLACK HOLE data for research purposes. In particular, to provide
large volumes of data for ICTR-DMR to research, develop and trial new data
mining analytics.

•	To put data back into BLACK HOLE via MAILORDER. - (Implementation
Detail - there is currently no MAILORDER capability directly onto either of the
BH servers (mgmt or storage ExDS). It is envisaged that, at least initially, all
data will be provided through the Buffer.)

28.	Any new QFD and associated application being considered for tech-transfer will
have previously been deployed within the TR area. Once it has been decided that
the QFD is providing, or has the potential to provide enough business benefit,
then TR and T will get together to discuss whether it is a good candidate for tech-
transfer.

29.	The discussion must, amongst other things, consider whether there is an existing
QFD that could satisfy the data requirements of the new application. Although a
new QFD may have been created in support of the new application, it may be
possible, through re-engineering of the application, for it to use one of the existing
QFDs.

30.lt is envisaged that there will be a number of servers within the BLAZING
SADDLES environment that may be used for trialling new QFDs. Initially these
would be individual servers, but the aim is to be able to use some of the
processing provided with the new BLACK HOLE storage.

31.	QFDs and applications coming out of the TR labs will have been developed using
the TR BLACK HOLE as their data source. To enable the rapid transition from TR
to the NGE environment, these new QFDs will initially be tech-transferred with the
NGE BLACK HOLE as their data source. This simply reinforces the importance of
keeping the TR and NGE BLACK HOLES in step, as far as is possible.

32.	Once the QFD/Application have proved that they provide enough business benefit,
then work will start to migrate them onto more suitable hardware. This migration
should include re-engineering of the QFD and its associated loading software to
use the NGE Buffer as its data source, rather than the NGE BLACK HOLE.

33.	For a new QFD to be trialled on BLACK HOLE, TDB-Events would expect the
following to occur:

•	TR and T need to work closely together to ensure that both have a good
understanding of what capacity is available, and what new QFDs are on the
horizon. There is not an unending supply of processing and storage in the
NGE environment. At some stage, a priority call will need to be made
concerning new QFDs coming into the new environment. Decisions will need
to be made by a group including T, TR, Ops, etc.

•	The new QFD will follow a template agreed between TR and TDB-Events.
This will help ensure the QFD is at a consistent and suitable level for trialling

7	of 13

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of InforrTiaionAciiOOOand^iavbesubiec^oexemD^nurcer

other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ on

SECRET STRAP1