TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

(U) KEY AIMS & ACTIONS

(U) We seek to maximize the SIGINT mission's value to the nation in the context of the
intelligence priorities and technological realities of the network age. Fortunately, no matter what
streams of operational and engineering initiatives - from the incremental to the transformational
- are running their course at a particular time, a few core structures can channel them for best
effect. The follow ing goals are intended to do just that. As implementation of the plan proceeds,
the responsibilities described below will be further decomposed into subtasks for various mission
elements and levels. Ultimately, much of the daily work of the SIGINT enterprise will benefit,
including the immediate mission imperatives presented in Appendix B.

(U//FOUO) Goal 1: Annually improve SIGINT on NIPF “priority I” tasks and “Band A” topics
in general, as measured by more even performance across topics and rising performance overall. ’

A.	(U) Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning in October 2007. the mission’s Deputy
Director for Customer Relationships (DDCR) will assess SIGINT mission performance
against NIPF “Band A” tasks using methods outlined in Appendix A. The DDCR will
provide the mission's senior leaders with quarterly "Hand A " performance reports and
quarterly identification of un- or under-satisfied “Hand A " tasks.

B.	(U//FOUO) Responsibility- and Accountability: Beginning in FY08, the DDCR will lead the
missions Deputy' Directors for Analysis and Production (DDAP) and Data Acquisition
(DDDA), and Associate Deputy Director for SIGINT Development (ADD SIGDEV) through
joint reviews of un- or under-satisfied “Band A” tasks to find and address problems. The
DDC R will provide the SIGINT Director with quarterly improvement plans and progress
reports, including concurrence, analysis, and commitments from the DDAP, DDDA, and
ADD SIGDEV.

C. (U//FOUO) Responsibility and Accountability: By April 2008, the DDDA will begin
tracking the current and expected purpose and (using documented business rules)
productivity of Is*, 2nd, and 3fd party' SIGINT accesses.'1 The DDDA will provide the SIGINT
Director with quarterly comparisons of the "Rand A " tasks given to, and the disposition and
use o f the resultant collection from, each access, highlighting un- or under-satisfied tasks.

D.	(U//FOUO) Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning in FY09, the DDDA will
systematically reengineer, retire, or replace (directly or though a partner) chronically

(U//FOUO) While performance against "Band A" topics is our benchmark, we will continue to work all
high priority tasks, and lesser “Band B" and “Band C issues when it's affordable and plays to our strengths.

(U//FOUO) “Access” as used here refers to data sources that an; at least partially funded via the collection
and operations investment portfolio. Tlic purpose or productivity of an access may relate to tipping, steering, or
otherwise enabling other collectors, as opposed to collecting targeted information directly. Uniqueness and
untapped potential are also factors to consider as is the expected contribution of an access in the event of a
reasonably likely and significant future crisis or concern.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

5