TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

often via bulk “midpoint” collection of global backbones. Vendors and sendee providers must
also be leveraged to obtain metadata and other targeting and vulnerability information, as well as
traffic. “Endpoint” operations must expand, to retrieve more targeted data directly and to alter
routing or encryption for the benefit of passive sensors.

(S//SI//REL) Midpoint collectors will still be used to acquire content (and not just metadata), but
with less success and at greater cost as traffic volumes and velocities rise. Mobile and tactical
systems, covert and clandestine programs, and overhead assets will continue to perform their
specialized tasks until the spread of network technology offers a better play, and will be
modernized as the mission requires or when automation or new technology can significantly
reduce long-term manpow er or lifc-cyclc support costs. Endpoint methods will be used for more
ELINT and FIS tasks, gathering data on some weapons or emitters before they’re deployed.

(I ) Processing and Exploitation

(S//SI//REL) If collection operations around the globe are to work in tandem in real-time, then
the processing and exploitation fabric of the SIGINT system must provide for distributed storage
and robust messaging. Fast, flexible, front-end processors must spot targets based on patterns,
events, or metadata rather than pre-defined selectors or brute force scanning of content. High
performance computing systems must extract meaning from huge data sets and to negate data
encryption and computer access controls.

(S//SI//REL) Ncwr developments will stress standardized interfaces that let diverse applications
share infrastructure, and will favor automation and off-the-shelf technology over manual
processes and point solutions. New SIGINT system architectures will de-couple event detection
from follow-on reaction and processing, so that applications can be added or deleted with little
impact to ongoing operations and so that sensors and processors can serve many tasks rather than
one operational stovepipe. All this - and increased use of remotely configurable commercial
hardware - will also cut the time needed to retool or refocus technical infrastructure as customer
needs, target behaviors, or technical constraints change; they'll reduce life-cycle costs as well.

(L) Analysis and Production

(S//SI//REL) In the aftermath of the digital revolution, powerful analytics and empowered
analysts are how we discover targets and their secrets and how we harness our technical
capabilities to our customers’ missions. Advances in collection and processing must let us flag
events of interest as they happen, accumulate far more context-rich metadata, and collate
targeted communications and transactions across accesses. To take advantage of this, analysts
must have new tasking, association, and presentation tools, and larger and more adaptable
storage and retrieval systems. Fortunately, information management and mining is central to the
Internet age and next-generation analytics can employ many commercial products and practices.

(S//REL) Looking forward, we will continue to devote more analysts to exploiting digital
network intelligence and to working problems related to counter-terrorism, counter-proliferation.
China, Iran, and the Middle East, aggressively investing in the necessary tools and training, and
“franchising” some mature missions to qualified partners. We will deemphasize the traditional
concept of a SIGINT storefront (requirements in/reporting out) in favor of having far more
analysts working physically or virtually within the missions that they support. They will act
more as a consultancy than a simple data source, helping shape customer plans to reflect the “art

(U//FOUO) Some characterization of actual emitters in real world operation may still, however, be
necessary.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

8