 OF SE OR ETri-tth MIN  OF 
Targeting Ratienale (TAR)

TO USA, FURY) The basic premise ef this precess is te ruernerialize wiry veu the
analvst have requested targeting. This ratienale will he previded te eru' external PISA
Penendrnent Act (FAA) everseers, the Department cf Justice and Office cf the Oirecter ef
Natienal Intelligence. fer all FAA targeting.

(SIESIHREL TO USA, ever) Tvilhile we de want te pr'evide eur FAA everseers with the
they need. we DO NOT want te give any erttrarreeus infennatien- Please
fellew these instructiens carefully te place a ?Targeting Ratienale? in the Target Infernratirrn
field in UTT and the Selectcr ?eld in Octave (Nete: There are additienal
helew cencerning issues with Octave). This ratierrale can he ne lenger than cne
short sentence. Please see the screen captures helew fer pr'eper placeruerrf-

The TAR ruust be in the fellewirrg fenuat:   Targeting Ratienale 
sentence!  (N etc: The and leading and trailing triple slashes are critical.)

(UHFOUO) Targeting Requests will he sent back te draft when the TAR is net present er dees
net rueet the helew criteria. Please centect veur FAA Preduct Line Lead fer help as needed-

TO USA. raver) The essential eleruents needed in the targeting
r'atienale are: ?User? ef the selecter. 'irl'   ed 1?10 i r. :1 ?rst-.2: 
and the fereign intelligence purpese. Aveid the use efacrenvrr'rs when pessihle. when used the}r
he eXpanded-

TO USA. FUE Y) Ycur' r'atienale MUST NOT in anv additienal infenrratien
including: prehehle cause?like infennstien (ie. veru' analvlic judgment), hew veu carne
te veur anach cenclusiens. any infernratien. classi?catien ruarkiug, er selecter'
infen'rratien.

Belew are seine actual examples {please use the term ?User? er ?Selecter? net vein
target?s naure)- slreuld censult their FAA Pr'edrret Line Lead fcr' qUestieus cencerning
TAR 

Fereign chernnrent Certi?caticrr Examples

fitTAR: User is a fiftii-?i  efFer'eign
Affairer
WT AR: User is 1 I Iraan
tftTAR: User is the In. fer
HITAR: User is is  ween-ii   the Verteeuelarr?rarr?r
WTAR: User is a 1.15.7:  

te Sudanfh?
WTAR: User is a mi. 

.   221. '51 ms:  
?the Middle East and Seuthwest Asia .sv

     
 

in Iraqi#

 
  

 

Derived 1-52
Dated: US
Dectassifv Orr. 14
TOP SE CR OF. 

'l'LlP MR

INTAR: L'ser is the head ef the Libya?s delegatierr 

r?fr?T AR: liser is the secerrd secretary at the in t'luhafft'
WT AR: L'ser' is ?te the President 

Cernlrating Preliferatierr Certi?eatien Examples

r'r?x'TAR: lfser i_t {Palestan Aterurc Energy 

. 5W

terse; L'ser the 
Fri ergy ssierr PA Fit.) "r . tit
Research |[Terrier?

liser is the
in 
MTAR: Liser is a Syrian henrb ruaker ins-'elved in supplying electrerrics fer use in IEDs te Irarli
custeruers .tr?t'
lit-"TAR: lfser' is irwelved with the (Research. design. testing and evaluatierr) ef
space and nrissile weapens systernsr'e?

   
   
 

   
 
 
   

r: vlriclr cerrld previde
av
INTAR: L'scr wer?ks tier the Energy Orgarriaatien eflran 

was: 17ser'is invelved in -ruissile-related research a 
_Telu'an fer" lran?r?

Ceunterterrerisnr Certification Examples

 
 

til-TAR: {set is in direct centact with l-Ieahellah 

.t'r?rTAR: l..'ser' has centact with Taliban?affiliate and weapens-"thugs 

WT AR: ljser' is ?-?il?ereda ?asseciated weh 
terse; Liser is in direct centact with clesc asseciatc ef Al-anda facilitaterztir?

eras: Selecter was terrnd en r'ecevered rnedia efAl-Qaeda East Attica leader in Eerualiaftr?
WT AR: Selecter' was feurrd en buddy list ef Al?Qaeda East Africa asseciater'tl?

1lr?lferlvting 1with ether em mples:

Analyst Input: a serrier level Saudi eil efficial 
?w

Re?wnrderl: tut-?TAR: User is an adviser? te the Saudi Arahrar?W

 

wlre is an

Analyst Input: This email address is used a PRC. natierral
a PRO

IT pr?efessienal 1
nuclear weapens ..
Re-wnrderl: WT AR: User is an infennatien teclurele
weapen

  
 
 
 

r'et?essienal at a {Shines-e nuclear

   

Analyst Input: til-TAR: l?vleharuruad Badguy was err the buddy list cf Al-andzJ?in
lvlegadislru Serualia. lvleharurnad Badguv's hr'cthernirvlaw.

Re?wnrkerl: .r'r'rT AR: Selecler was feund en huddy list Serualisv?ft

Tr'iP MP.

TOP SE CR ETHCOMINTHN OF 

UTT Example

User is the Secend Secretary at the Iraqi Embassy in Riyadh, Saudi Arabiafi 
PLEASE DO NOT USE YOUR TARGET ?s NAME in the TAR, it will be r'eectedb Over'si ht!

 

Target Information
Target Identity 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Unlinan

Target Harrie Muhammad Fake Ham-r3 mm}

Slrarenhle Hallie Muhammad Page Name

Slrarsalris --
Justification 

Telnet Type Persen 

l'inrleutilityr :1 
Lecatielr I Ll

Target 3 as]. use, stir-3, TAN, ess, rc-E' 
Classi?catien ,?ip

Restricl Visibilin l?

Targ


C?mmem? HITARI User 1: ch: sec-end secretary at the 
ELI-mass 

 

      

  

e1

   

     

 

    
 

l-i'l

 
 
   

Intelligence

 

 

 

 

GWPAIMWI All? -Seiect Geepelilical Aren? 
Tali?? select Oeepeliticel Arse? ll
'5?th Fi? select Geepelitical Arse? 

Prieriry
HRA 

OFORNH leR

TOP SE OR TEEN OF 
Octave ample

Additienal Octave Insli'uctiens:

Sheuld the analyst net have access te the Selecter Oemrnents Field TOFI vs. ROPI issue} er
have run cut ef r'eem fer the TAR within and are net able te rearrange the text, please send an
E-mail centaining an explanatien, which includes the selecter', aleng with ycru' TAR te ?dl
tb_ectave? fer reselutien-

User is a ?te the Iranian Presidentr??
PLEASE DO NUT USE YOUR TARGETIS NAME in the TAR, it will be rejected by Over'sighti

II'EntryIICI-rss eerie. lg, -I
Tepri:

curiae-pie ll:r Quick seem Haul Ten-int- 

 

Legal Arrtheliaatren

Legal Authelizatien Expires i l?'ltld 

 
      
 

 
  

 

fr'f't'h?: LPEEF: is a
the Iranian 

   

Select-er Lemme"!

[cairn-rent Fer ?range Leg:

 

Extended Tasking m? Twu (mi.
Tipping: I
Submit a Return Results I Bulimia. Deter Results I

[?ees I

 

TOP SE 

