SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR//20291123

(U) II. Strategic Mission List - Enduring Targets

(S//SHA. MISSION: China: Enabling II.S. policy and avoiding strategic surprise. Focus Areas:

Provide U S. decision makers with a holistic SIGINT perspective of trends and developments in China,
assessing and/or predicting strategic direction, plans, intentions, and capabilities that impact U S interests.
Such analysis must consider China’s strategic foreign and economic policy trends that impact U S.
interests or degrade U S influence, the pace, scope, doctrine, and economic sustainability of China’s
military modernization, the proliferation of PRC weapons and technology; the prospects for regional
conflict or strategic nuclear attack; domestic economic transformation and its consequences for economic,
political, and social stability, subversive threats to U.S. institutions through hostile intelligence and
information operations, and the interdependencies among these developments Accepted Risks: Certain
domestic problem sets, such as demographic issues; lower-level political institutional growth; civil society-
issues such as crime and human rights; environmental problems and planning; and agricultural production
and food security' Also, issues that transcend national boundaries, such as Chinese involvement in
international organized crime; energy demand, production, and acquisition; and infectious disease and
health.

(S//S1) B. MISSION: North Korea: Enabling the US to counteract North Korea’s
development/use/proliferation ofWMD, deter its aggression, and shape its behavior while
maintaining U.S. readiness for collapse/war. Focus Areas: Provide U.S. decision-makers with a holistic
SIGINT perspective of trends and developments in North Korea, assessing and/or predicting strategic
direction, plans, intentions, and capabilities that impact U.S interests and provide warning of strategic
threat. Such analysis must consider the stability of the North Korean regime and how it employs domestic
and foreign policies to maintain its grip on power; the relationship between regime stabihty.'bchavior and
its access to income from illicit activities and weapons proliferation; how Chinese and South Korean
“carrots and sticks” enable or constrain North Korean behavior; the impact of the decaying North Korean
economy on military' readiness; and how the interplay between U.S policy initiatives toward North Korea
and all of the above elements affect North Korea’s strategic calculus, the material disposition of its nuclear
weapons, and the status of its military Accepted Risks: For domestic issues, risks include non-defense
oriented industrial production, demographic issues, and environmental problems. Regarding issues that
transcend borders, risks include non-counterintelligence associated ties between North Korean state-
sponsored illicit activities and international organized crime institutions and individuals; North Korean
agent activity in South Korea and Japan; non-state sponsored corruption and illicit behavior; and North
Korean economic refugee flows into China

(S//S1) C. MISSION: Iraq: Enabling Coalition efforts to assist Iraq in establishing a secure, unified,
democratic, and sovereign state. Focus Areas: Provide U.S decision makers with a holistic SIGINT
perspective of trends and developments, assessing Iraq’s progress toward establishing a viable, stable
government, securing public order, suppressing insurgent opposition, ensuring reliable access to basic
services and commodities; safeguarding strategic resources; and restoring a more sound economic footing.
Provide intelligence on relevant factors, forces, leaders, and regional actors to facilitate U.S. Government

SEC RET//COMINT//REL TO USA. AUS, CAN, GBR/20291123