TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

(U) APPENDIX A: Assessing Overall Performance

(U//FOUO) Customers request SIGINT by specifying the “essential elements of information”
(EEIs) that they want to uncover. The National Intelligence Priorities Framework (NIPF) maps
each F.EI into one of three bands (A, B. or C) of successively decreasing concern according to
general topic, and assigns a I-5 priority based on the combination of the topic and specific
geopolitical or non-state entity involved. Responsive SIGINT is delivered in several forms, but
serialized reporting dominates, and so one indicator of end-to-end mission performance is the
percentage of requested EEIs for which at least some responsive reporting is provided (i.e., the
EEI citation rate).

(U//FOUO) At a macro-level, the overall citation rate for “Band A” EEIs should be greater than
that for “Band B,” which in turn should exceed that for “Band C”. Beyond that, performance
against each “Band A” topic is also weighed in accordance with the following first-order rules.
Performance is poor if a “Band A” topic’s rate doesn’t even exceed the overall “Band B” rate.
Performance is weak if a topic's rate is above the overall “Band B” rate, but less than the overall
“Band A” rate. Performance is fair or gootl if a topic’s rate is at or above the overall “Band A”
rate, with the latter also requiring that the rate for the topic’s “priority 1” EEIs be higher than that
for the topic's EEIs generally.

(U) Citation rates reflect only the existence of responsive SIGINT, and not its impact. Moreover,
they don’t directly account for requests that are addressed entirely by other than serialized
reporting, and they can be skewed by careless recordkeeping or differences in granularity
between EEIs. Therefore, quarterly citation rate assessments arc complemented with two
broader, more subjective, and more manpower intensive views of customer outcomes and
satisfaction.

(U//FOUO) The first is a quarterly, manual assessment of performance against each NIPF “Band
A” topic that includes niche interactions that don't involve EEIs as well as deliverables beyond
serialized reporting. Performance is graded on the extent to which records show that responsive
information was pushed to or pulled by a customer, and sampling suggests that the records that
tie deliverables to requests are accurate, and sampling suggests that the information delivered
was germane vice just tangential. Performance is poor if responsiveness is w ell below average
(relative to that for “Band A” tasks as a whole), weak if responsiveness is somewhat below
average, fair if responsiveness is average or better, and good if responsiveness overall is average
or better and is better still against high priorities.

(U//FOUO) The second is a quarterly survey of roughly 20 intelligence consumers, specified by
position based on their ability to speak knowledgably and authoritatively about the SIGINT
contributions to key civil or military customers. Those solicited represent the unified combatant
commands and the Joint StafT; the Departments of State. Treasury, Commerce. Energy, and
Homeland Security; the Central Intelligence and Defense Intelligence Agencies, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation; the Ding Enforcement Administration; the National Counterterrorism
Center: the U.S. Trade Representative; and the White House Situation Room.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

10