SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR//20291123

United States SIGINT System Strategic Mission List-

Januarv2007

(U) I. Strategic Mission List - Topical Missions

(S//S1) A. MISSION: Terrorism: Winning the Global War on Terrorism.

Focus Areas:

a.	All Interagency Intelligence Committee on Terrorism (I1CT) Tier 0 and 1 terrorist groups with

capabilities and intentions to attack the US, its interests or allies, or groups actively planning or
carrying out a terrorist attack against U S. persons, facilities, or interests

b.	Key individuals and Terrorist Support Entities (TSE) involved in the facilitation, financing, and

recruitment or radical ization of all 1ICT Tier 0 and 1 terrorist group networks globally.

Accepted Risks: All IICT Tier 2,3, and 4 terrorist groups, and TSEs.

(S//S1) B. MISSION: Homeland Security: Protecting the U.S. Homeland from terrorist attack and
other transnational threats to safeguard U.S. persons, freedoms, critical information, infrastructure,
property and economy.

Focus Areas:

a Border Security (land, air, sea).

b.	Direct defense against terrorist attack.

c.	Diseases, epidemics, and pandemics.

d.	Executive Pnotection/U.S.-Based NSSEs

e.	Illicit Facilitation as it relates to special interest aliens and CBRN materials and technology
Accepted Risks:

a Accepted risks as stated in the “Terrorism” mission.

b.	Global coverage of all illicit activities of potential concern to the Homeland.

(S//SI//REL USA, AUS, CAN, GBR) C. MISSION: WMD and CBRN Programs and Proliferation:
Combating the Threat of Development and Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, CBRN,
and Delivery Methods (particularly ballistic and nuclear-capable cruise missiles).

Focus Areas:

a.	Dev elopment, Acquisition, or Use of CBRN.

b.	State WMD and ballistic and cruise missile programs of:

China (biological, chemical, nuclear, ballistic and cruise missiles)

India (nuclear, ballistic missiles)

Iran (biological, chemical, nuclear, and ballistic missiles)

North Korea (biological, chemical, nuclear, ballistic missiles)

Pakistan (nuclear, ballistic missiles)

Russia (biological, chemical, nuclear, ballistic and cruise missiles)

Syria (chemical, nuclear, ballistic missiles).

c.	W MD and missile proliferation activities by states:

China (nuclear, ballistic missiles), Israel (cruise missiles)

North Korea (nuclear, ballistic missiles)

SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA. AUS. CAN. GBR/20291123