TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

(U) VISION, VECTORS, & VALUES

(U) Our mission is to answer questions about threatening activities that others mean to keep
hidden. Tin's is the essence of what we accomplish for the American people, whether we're
supporting the global war on terrorism, infiltrating the leadership circles of strategic rivals or
rogue states, or anticipating geopolitical and target technology trends.

(U//FOUO) Our vision, or aspiration, is to utterly master the foreign intelligence implications of
networks and network technology. Even conservative people and institutions find themselves
having to entrust their plans and operations to networks or else so limit their ability to acquire
information, issue instructions, and move people, money, materiel, and ideas as to risk
irrelevance. The mission must be planned, equipped, and executed for best effect, against the
objectives that matter most, in this brave new digital world.

(U) At the heart of the task is the need to sense, and make sense of, systems, traffic, users, and
various ty pes and levels of organizations. This is a circular and fast moving process. New
insight leads to better sensing, which leads to still greater insight, and so on - sometimes in
months, but sometimes in minutes.

(S//SI//REL) Today, most of what we access goes unexplored or unexploited. Humans can
neither follow network fiows in real-time nor forge intelligence gold from an accumulation of
isolated data points whose worth is only apparent when combined w ith one another and with
what others may know . Our global sensors need to be able to think for themselves and talk to
one another instantaneously. Our processing systems need to automatically find meaning in and
across vast and dispersed data sets. Our analysts need new skills and new tools, and need to
apply them in new ways, often in concert with customers. Our business processes need to
promote data-driven decision-making and more disciplined end-to-end planning.

(U) This will not happen without leadership and the courage to ask if the practices and structures
that sen e us well today will continue to do so in the future. At the same time, some immutable
values must continue to influence our daily choices and behavior. All military' and civilian
employees are called to commit to lawfulness, honesty, integrity, fairness, accountability,
loyalty, collaboration, innovation, and learning. As we in the SIGINT mission grapple with the
peculiar risks and rewards of the times and tasks at hand, a few implications of these
commitments warrant special comment:

r (U) SIGINT professionals must hold the moral high ground, even as terrorists or dictators
seek to exploit our freedoms. Some of our adversaries wrill say or do any thing to advance
their cause; we will not. All employees must have uncompromising devotion to personal and
institutional integrity doing the right thing, every time, regardless of how difficult it is.

r (U) SIGINT professionals must be honest with themselves, colleagues, superiors, and
overseers. When something won't work, isn't working, hasn't worked, or went wrong, we
need to say so, with respect, but also with unmistakable clarity. Wc then find a different way
forward.

> (U) SIGINT professionals need to grow and prosper as mission assets and as individuals.
We encourage career-long learning, periodic stretch assignments, and a balance between
work and home life that honors duty to family, community, and self as well as to country.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

4