SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR//20291123

Pakistan (nuclear, ballistic missiles)

Russia (ballistic missile).

d.	WMD and missile acquisition activities by states:

China (cruise missiles)

India (cruise missiles)

Iran (nuclear, ballistic missiles)

Pakistan (cruise missiles)

Saudi Arabia (nuclear, ballistic missiles).

e.	Safety and Security of WMD:

Pakistan (nuclear)

Russia (nuclear).

Accepted Risks:

State W'MD and ballistic and cruise missile programs of:
Egypt (ballistic missiles)

Libya (ballistic missiles)

Taiwan (ballistic missiles).

(S//SI) D. MISSION: IJ.S. Forces at Risk (Military Support): Protecting U.S. Military Forces
Deployed Overseas and Enabling their Operations.

Focus Areas:

a.	U S. forces deployed in: Iraq. Afghanistan. Mideast Region. Korea, and Philippines.

b.	Support to military planning and operations: Support to OPLAN 5027 (Korea).

c.	Intentions of foreign and indigenous anti-coalition forces, command and control. OOB, and

operational support in Iraq and Afghanistan.

d.	Support to U S forces in identification of HVTs in Afghanistan1' Pakistan and Iraq
Accepted Risks:

a Protection of U S forces deployed in: Balkans (Kosovo),

b South Korea leadership intentions in OPLAN 5027.

c Routine military support to U.S. forces deployed in non-combat situations.

(S//S1) E. MISSION: State/Political Stability: Providing Warning of Impending State Instability.
Focus Areas:

a.	Internal political activities that could threaten the survivability of leadership in countries where US

has interest in regime continuity Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia.

b.	Internal political activities that could result in crisis in North Korea, Sudan/Dafur humanitarian crisis.

Cuba, Kosovo, Turkey, Nigeria, Lebanon, Venezuela, Syria, Bolivia, Latin American Bolivarian
Developments, and Palestinian Authority.

Accepted Risks: Internal political stability of: Egypt, Zimbabwe, Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia, DROC,
Bangladesh, Georgia, Jordan, and Haiti

(S//SI) F. MISSION: Warning of Strategic Nuclear Missile T hreats: Providing Warning of a
Strategic Nuclear Missile Attack on the territory of the 50 United States.

Focus Areas: Areas covered under a peacetime SIGINT strategy maintaining full capabilities with
reasonably sufficient coverage for the provision of warning include: Russia's Nuclear C3, Mobile

SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA. AUS, CAN, GBR/20291123