TUP SECRETHSIHNDFURN

Naticnal Security Agencyi'Central 19 April 2D13
Security Service

Paper

 

(TSHREL TD USA, Subject: NSA Intelligence Relaticnship with Israel

(U) 

(TSHN F) NSA maintains a far-reaching technical and analytic relaticnship with the
Israeli SIGINT Naticnal Unit (ISNU) sharing an access, intercept, targeting,
language, analysis and repcrting. This SIGINT relalicnship has increasingly been the
catalyst far a brcader intelligence relaticnship between the United States and Israel.
Signi?cant changes in the way NSA and ISNU haye traditicnally apprcached SIGINT
haye an expansicn tc include cther Israeli and .S. intelligence crganiz aticns
such as CIA, Mcssad, and Special Dperalfcn Diyisicn (SUD).

(U) Key Issues

(TSHSIHN F) The single largest exchange between NSA and ISN is an targets in the
Middle East which strategic threats tc US. and Israeli interests. Building
upcn a rcbust analytic exchange, NSA and ISNU alsc haye and executed
unique tc gain access tc high pricrity targets. The mutually agreed upcn
gecgraphic targets include the ccuntries cf Africa, the Middle East, the Persian
Gulf, Scuth Asia, and the Islamic republics cf the farmer Scyiet Unicn. Within that set cf
ccuntries, ccyers the explcitaticn cf internal gcyernmental, military, ciyil,
and diplcmatic ccmmunicaticns; and external securityfintelligence crganiz aticns.
Regicnal Weapcns cf Mass Destruciicn F'rcliferaticn and "Stateless'TIntematicnal
Terrcrism the exchanged transnaticnal target set. A dedicated
ccmmunicaticns line between NSA and ISN the exchange cf raw material, as
well as daily analytic and technical NSA and ISNU haye liaiscn
cfficers, ccnduct fcreign relaticns functicns, staticned at their respectiye
embassies.

(TSHREL TD USA, What NSA Prcyides tc ISNU

(TSHSIHREL TD USA, ISR) The Israeli side the benefits cf expanded gecgraphic
access tc NSA and SIGINT engineering expertise, and alsc
gains access tc adyanced .S. and equipment yia
buys and fcreign military sales.

(TSHREL TD USA, What ISNU Prcyides tc NSA

(TSHSIHREL TD USA, ISR) Benefits tc the US. include expanded gecgraphic access tc
high pricrity SIGINT targets, access tc Israeli and SIGINT
engineering expertise, and access tc a large cf highly qualified 

Derfyed Frcm: NSAICSSM 1-52
Dated: 
Declassify Dn: 2DST11D1
TDP 

TDP SECRETHSIHN 

(U) Success Stcries 

(TSHSIHREL TD USA, ISR) A key pricrity ISN is the Iranian nuclear deyelcpment
by Syrian nuclear Lebanese Hizballah plans and intenticns,
Palestinian terrcrism, and Clcbal Jihad. Seyeral recent and successful jcint cperaticns
between NSA and ISNU haye brcadened crganizaticns' ability tc target and explcit
Iranian nuclear In additicn, a rcbust and dynamic relaticnship has
enabled cn high pricrity Iranian targets.

(TSHREL TD USA, ISR) NSA and ISNU ccntinue tc initiate jcint targeting cf Syrian and
Iranian leadership and nuclear deyelcpment with CIA, ISNU, SDD and
Mcssad. This exchange has been particularly as unrest in Syria ccntinues,
and bath sides tcgether tc identify threats tc regicnal stability. cyber
partnerships expanded beycnd ISNU tc include Israeli Defense Intelligence's SDD and
Mcssad, resulting in unprecedented access and ccllecticn that all sides
wculd haye been pcssible tc achieye withcut the cthers.

(TSHSIHN F) In July 2D12, the foice cf the Directcr cf Naticnal Intelligence (DDN I)
prcyided guidance expanded sharing with the GDI (Gayernm ent cf Israel) cn Egypt.
This has allcwed NSA tc task ISM cn select strategic issues, specifically
terrcrist elements in the Sinai.

(SHIN F) Beycnd the traditicnal SIGINT relaticnship, NSA and ISNU signed a MDU in
September 2D11 prcyiding aticn Assurancet'Ccm puter Defense
ccllabcratfcn. aticn Assurance Deputy Directcr attended an 
ccnference in Tel in January 2012 during which NSA and ISN established
cbjectiyes far the relaticnship. NSA intends tc fccus the ccllabcraticn cn cyber threats
Iran, Hizballah and ether regicnal and may prcyide limited, fccused 
cn specific Russian and Chinese cyber threats. Ccnferences tc further deyelcp this
partnership were held in May 2D12 and December 2D12.

(TSHSIHREL TD USA, ISR) NSA and ISNU led their ccmmunities in the establishment
cf U.S. - Israeli Intelligence Ccmmunity MTC ccnnectiyity that sides tc
brcaden and accelerate the pace cf ccllabcraticn against targets? use cf adyanced
teleccmmunicaticns. Target sets include, but are net limited tc Iran Nuclear, Syrian
Fcreign Fighter mcyements, Lebanese Hizballah and Iranian Reycluticnary Guard
actiyities. Dialcgue is cngcing, with each pctentfal new intelligence cr 
initiatiye ccnsidered indiyidually.

(U) 

(TSHN F) The three ccncerns raised by ISNU regarding the partnership
with NSA is NSA's reluctance tc share an that is net directly related tc a
specific target, ISM U?s perceiyed reducticn in the am cunt and degree cf in
certain areas, and the length cf time NSA takes tc decide cn ISN in
these three areas haye been addressed with the partner and NSA ccntinues tc tc

TDP 2

TDP 

increase with ISNU where and mindful cf U.S. pclicy and
equity ccncerns.

cum-a) Updated by: 

Ccuntry Desk Of?cer

Fcreiin Affairs Directcrate

 

TDP 

