TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

underperforming accesses. The DDDA will annually provide the SIGINT Director with a
multiyear "access enhancement ’’ plan as part of the program build cycle.

E.	(U) Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning in FY08. the Agency’s Chief Technology
Officer (CTO) - with the fiill support of relevant collection, analysis, and customer
engagement elements will start to systematically instrument SIGINT tasking, ingestion,
processing, analysis, and delivery systems to automatically tag data so that its source and
subsequent processing and handling can be associated with some categorization of its
ultimate use or intelligence value. The CTO will provide the Agency's Senior Leadership
with semi-annual reports on the percentage of data accessed that can he so associated.

(U//FOUO) Goal 2: Field an analytic workforce that promptly and methodically discovers and

exploits priority secrets entrusted to networks worldwide and helps customers turn this insight

into significant national outcomes.

A.	(U//FOUO) Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning with FY08. the CTO will enable
improved information discovery by orchestrating annual increases in the proportion of newly
acquired and archived data and metadata that can be readily searched and retrieved by
analysts across the enterprise using standard workstations. The ('TO will develop baseline
measures of accessible data. query times, and query difficulty, and provide the SIGINT
Director with annuaI improvement reports. beginning at the end ofLYOH.

B.	(U//FOUO) Responsibility and Accountability: In FY08 and out. the NSA/CSS Senior
Language and NSA/CSS Senior Intelligence Authorities will maintain a global training
requirement for all cryptologic language and intelligence analysts performing various classes
of missions and functions; will identify the types of learning activities that meet the
requirement, based on current and projected needs and workforce statistics; and will provide
data on organizational compliance to SIGINT mission and Agency leadership. The NSA/CSS
Senior language and Intelligence Authorities and line managers of relevant organizations
will ensure that at least 80% of all cryptologic intelligence and language analysts wilt
engage in ¡60 hours of prescribed approved professional development every two years, and
that at ¡east 10% of language and intelligence analysts working the counterterrorism mission
will be engaged in advanced or specialized training at any given time?

C.	(U//FOUO) Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning in FY08, the DDCR and the
DDAP will cultivate client-consultant relationships with more customers to facilitate new
and more productive tasking and consumption of SIGINT products and services. The DDAP
will provide the SIGINT Director with an annual report on the number, disposition, and
documented impact of analysts sewing in full-time consultancy assignments.

D.	(C//REL) Responsibility' and Accountability*: Beginning in FY08. the DDAP will increase
the practice of forward deploying analysts into customer workspaces to facilitate real-time
analysis and iterative consultation where needed. The DDAP will provide the SIGINT
Director with quarterly summaries of the number and location of forward deployed analysts
and their operational impact as assessed by customer surveys.

E.	(U//FOUO) Responsibility' and Accountability: Beginning in FY08. the DDAP will
systematically hand off mature analytic tasks to qualified partners when doing so increases

(U) The latter is already a requirement of the National Counterterrorism Intelligence Plan

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

6