SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA. ALS. CAN. GBR//20291123

United States S1GINT System
January 2007 Strategic Mission List

Introduction - Director’s Intent

(S//SI) The SIGINT Strategic Mission List represents the intent of the Director, National Security Agency
in regard to mission priorities and nsks for the United States SIGINT System (USSS) over the next 12-18
months The list is derived from review of the Intelligence Community National Intelligence Priorities
Framework, DC1/DNI Guidance, the Strategic Warning List, National SIGINT Requirements Process
(NSRP) and other strategic planning documents The missions included on the list are in relative priority
order and represent the most urgent tasks for the USSS The list is not intended to be all encompassing, but
is intended to set forth guidance on the highest priorities.

Topical Missions and Enduring Targets

(S//S1) The SIGINT Strategic Mission List is divided into two parts. It includes 16 critical topical missions
in Part I of the list, which represent missions discerned to be areas of highest priority for the USSS, where
SIGINT can make key contributions. In addition to the 16 critical topical missions, Part 11 of the SIGINT
Strategic Mission List includes 6 enduring targets that are included due to the need to work these targets
holistically because of their strategic importance. In addition to their long-term strategic importance, the
enduring targets can potentially “trump" the highest priority topical missions on the list at any time, based
upon evolving world events. Elements of these targets are also represented throughout the topical target
sets. For each of the 16 topical missions and each of the 6 enduring targets the Strategic Mission List
includes:

1)	Focus Areas - critically important targets against which the SIGINT enterprise is placing emphasis.
DIRNSA designation of a target as a focus area constitutes his guidance to the SIGINT System that it is a
“must do" target for that mission

2)	Accepted Risks strategically significant targets against which the USSS is not placing emphasis and
for which SIGINT should not be relied upon as a primary source. DIRNSA's reasons for accepting these
risks include high difficulty and lack of resources or as an “Economy of Force Measure,” in order to
achieve focus on the most critical targets

A Strategic Investment Tool for SIGINT Resources

(S//S1) Given a finite level of resources available in all mission areas, the Strategic Mission List provides
high-level strategic direction to the global SIGIN T system to focus resources on the most important/highest
priority areas. “Risks" identify targets that cannot be resourced to the level of a Focus Area, thereby
acknowledging that shortfalls will exist. As world circumstances change, these or other targets can be
added to the list as needed, targets no longer of critical importance can also be removed from the Focus
Area category. In addition, other targets, not listed as focus or risk areas, can also be wrorked by the USSS
to a lesser degree to meet other customer requirements. The Strategic Mission List will be reviewed bi-
annually by the USSS Signals Intelligence leadership Team Missions. Focus areas, and Accepted Risks
will be adjusted as a means of providing high-level steerage to the Nation’s agile SIGINT System

Derived From: NSA/CSSM 1-52
Dated: 20041123
Declassify On: 20291123

SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA. ALS. CAN. GBRV20291123