SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR//20291123

(S//S1 ) N. MISSION; Narcotics and Transnational Criminal Syndicates and Networks: Mitigating
the impact on U.S. national interests from drug trafficking organizations (DTOs) and transnational
criminal syndicates and networks (TCSNs).

Focus Areas:

a.	DTOs and associated enabling activities in Afghanistan, Mexico and Colombia that threaten

U.S. interests.

b.	TCSNs based in (or originating in) Russia that threaten U.S. or allied interests.

c.	Money laundering that benefits TCSNs within, into, and out of Colombia and Mexico

d.	Criminal facilitators acting as a nexus between crime/narcotics and terrorism.

e.	State-sponsored money laundering by Iran and North Korea.

Accepted Risks:

a Drug productioiv’trafficking within the Golden Triangle, China, and North Korea
b. TCSNs operating in Central Asia, former Eastern Europe, and Asia,
c Criminal associated money laundering in Afghanistan, and Iraq.

State-sponsored money laundering by Syria.

(S//S1) O. MISSION: Economic Stability/Influence: Ensuring U.S. Economic Advantage and Policy
Strategies.

Focus Areas: Economic stability, financial vulnerability, and economic influence of states of strategic
interest to the US: China, Japan, Iraq, and Brazil

Accepted Risks: Economic stability, financial vulnerability, and economic influence of states of strategic
interest to the US: Turkey and India.

(S//S1) P. Mission: Global Signals Cognizance: The core communications infrastructure and global
network information needed to achieve and maintain baseline knowledge. Capture knowledge of
location, characterization, use, and status of military and civil communications infrastructure, including
command, control, communications and computer networks: intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance and
targeting systems; and associated structures incidental to pursuing Strategic Mission List priorities. Focus
of mission is creating knowledge databases that enable SIGINT efforts against future unanticipated threats
and allow continuity on economy of force targets not currently included on the Strategic Mission List.
Focus Areas:

Global Environment knowledge
Signals knowledge

Network knowledge.

Target knowledge.

Accepted Risks: Degree of maturity may greatly vary by target

SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA. AUS, CAN, GBR//20291123