TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

(U) BACKGROUND

(U//FOUO) America invests in intelligence programs to detect, and to provide full and timely
answers to questions about, the hidden pursuits of persons, states, or organizations. In the case
of signals intelligence (SIGINT). the expectation is that surveillance of targeted electronic
signals and systems will yield insight that’s worth the costly capabilities and operations needed
to obtain it. For over 50 years, from World War II through the global war on terrorism, this
investment has been justified, but the mission is still rightly judged by the answers it delivers.
The implied business model is to position the mission to cover enough priority targets to ensure a
steady stream of valued products and sendees for decision makers and other SIGINT consumers.

(U) This strategic plan seeks to maintain or enhance the mission’s value in light of the challenges
and opportunities - of the unfolding network age. It frames and establishes several key aims
and assigns responsibility for actions needed to attain them. At the highest level, success is
defined as stable or improved responsiveness to customer needs, while doing best against the
targets that matter most and avoiding strategic surprise.1

(U) The plan w as developed through the on-line collaboration of over 250 SIGINT practitioners
and partners, working within a framework created by the chief SIGINT strategist. It focuses on a
small set of acts that should pay large dividends, and introduces data-driven processes to track
progress, spot problems, and prompt adjustments. It’s how we’ll continue to modernize the way
we prepare for, perform, and appraise SIGINT operations in a world in transformation.

(U) DRIVERS

(S//REL) Since 2003 the intelligence community' has been guided by a national intelligence
priorities framework (NIPF) that maps customer needs into bands (A. B. and C) of successively
lower concern. “Band A” topics include those strategic, asymmetric, and other threats that have
the potential to greatly harm the L'.S. or its interests Within each topic, a 1-5 priority' is assigned
to specific geopolitical or non-state entities of interest, with I being the highest. Of course, not
all intelligence questions are necessarily best, or even reasonably, probed by SIGINT means.
Potential customers are asked to request SIGINT only when they can characterize its expected
contribution as supplementary, substantial, key. or extraordinary.

(S/7REL) Since October of 2005, a national intelligence strategy' has provided additional
direction. Its five overarching mission objectives are to defeat terrorism, prevent and counter the
spread of weapons of mass destruction, bolster the growlh of democracy, penetrate hard targets,
and anticipate developments of strategic concern. Of course, neither these nor the roster of
“Band A” topics represent a radical shift from prior thinking. For several years, the SIGINT
system has pursued these issues, intensifying efforts to harvest data from computers. Internet
traffic, and other packetized communications in the process. As the chart shows, there has in

(U) As outlined in Appendix A, end-to-end performance will be judged by quantitative and qualitative
analysis of customer requests and mission deliverables, and by authoritative customer surveys.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

2