dynamic: page - HIGHEST possible classification js

TOP SECRET // SI tTK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) Turkey and the PKK
FROM:

FAD's Central/Ea stern Europe Office (DP13)
Run Date: 12/20/2005

(TS//SI) The U.S. feats that Turkey may undertake cross-border raids into Iraq in pursuit of Kurdish
PKK terrorists... NS A provides Turkey with SJGJNT about the group.

<S//SI) NSA's robust S1GJNT exchange writh our two Turkish paitners on indigenous terrorism
targets is primarily focused on the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK)*, and the PKK has been a
sensitive topic of recent high-level US-Turkish discussions. The Turkish Government and general
population strongly believe that the US should be doing more against PKK insurgents operating
from northern Iraq to conduct terrorist operations inside Turkey.

(S//S1) The US condemns the PKK as a terrorist group and accepts that the coalition and the Iraqi
Transitional Government and Turkey need to wrork together to do more against this threat. The US

views Turkey as a valuable partner in NATO and in the global war on terrorism (the 1 March 2003
Parliamentary vote that prevented the Coalition from using Turkey for Operation Iraqi Freedom
notwithstanding) but is all too aware that the Kurds per se in northern Iraq are friendly forces, and
cross-border operations are an Iraqi sovereignty issue,

(U) The specter of 30 million Kurds coalescing into an autonomous Kurdistan is a long-standing
political problem for Iraq, Iran, Syria, and Turkey, The Kutds are Turkey's latest non-Turkish
ethnic group and the only minority that can pose a threat to Turkish national unity. The PKK,
arguably the best known and most radical of the Kurdish movements, seeks to establish an
independent Marxist state in predominantly Kurdish southeastern Turkey,

(U) Since 1034, the PKK has conducted a violent terrorist insut^gency against the Government of
Turkey, highlighted by attacks on Turkish security forces, bombings of tourist sites inside Turkey,
and attacks on Turkish diplomatic and commercial facilities in dozens of West European cities.
Turkey has responded by deploying atmy units and elite police forces to violendy suppress the
insuiTgents. After the 1091 Persian Gulf War, Iraqi Kurds established a de facto state in northern Iraq
and allowed the PKK to set up semi-permanent bases there, Turkish Prime Minister Eidogan, in an
August 2005 Wall Street Journal piece, noted that Iraq should not be allowed to remain a training
ground for terrorists, whether al Qaeda or the PKK, and asserted that the PKK has already killed
more than 30,000 Turkish citizens.

(S//Sl)The US Government is concerned that Turkey might lose patience and conduct cross-border
operations inside Iraq while in hot pursuit of PKK insui^ents. US National Security Adviser Hadley
and SAC EUR*** General met separately in September 2005 with senior Turkish officials to
discuss the PKK, EUCOM, GENICOM and State Department all have irons in this fire and the
value of NSA's SJGJNT support to our Turkish partners has been consistently highlighted by both
the Charge1 and the Office of Defense Cooperation in the US Embassy in Ankara,

(TS//51) NCRTL'RK***, in Ankara, works closely with two Turkish SJGJNT partners, GES
(military) and ETI (civilian)****. NSA's collection efforts against the PKK, a third tier terrorist
organization, are generally limited to operations in no it he in Iraq, in southeastern Turkey, and in
Turkish tourist areas where bombings have occurred. We share SJGJNT product, technical
collection and analytic suppoit, and unique US collection with both Turkish partners. NS A normally
provides GES with a report every six hours locating a defined number of PKK handsets active
within Turkey; no data is provided to the Turks concerning PKK handsets active in no it he in Iraq.

NS A also provides data on insut^ent handsets to ETI in support of Turkey's Law Enforcement
Access program.

(TS//51) In an effort to support Turkey by doing more against the PKK, NCRTL'RK, CT/S213, and
GEO, in October 2005, provided GES with hourly reports on the locations of handsets used by the
PKK operating inside Turkey, This initiative was restricted by resource constraints to a two-week
period in suppoit of specific Turkish military operations. Feedback from the Turks on the
effectiveness of this enhanced S1G1NT support is pending at this time,

(S//S1) NS A, through the S1NTO for Europe, is also actively participating in US Intelligence
Community and Law Enforcement efforts to track financial support links for the PKK in Western
Europe, NSA's very few expert "follow-the-money" analysts are generally deployed against tier
zero and other very high priority tai^ets so we can only support a vety focused effort against PKK
finances, one that tai^ets individuals and oi^anizations for which lead information is available. Any
lead information will most likely come from the Turkish partners and that angle is being worked by
NCRTL'RK,

<S//SI) As US political and military strategists grapple with the thorny issue of howr to better assist
the Government of Turkey in combating the PKK, NS A and our Turkish SJGJNT partners are
already fully engaged in this important subset of the global war on terrorism.

(U) Notes: * (S//51) This terrorist group changes names like a chameleon changes colors. Currently
calling itself the People's Congress of Kurdistan (KGK, or Kongra-Gel), it has in the past been
knowrn as the Kurdistan Freedom and Democracy Congress (KADEK), and it originated and is still
referred to by most Turks as the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), NS A also targets and shares
SJGJNT with Turkey on the Revolutionary People's Liberation Party/Front (DHKP/C).

** (U) SACE UR = Supreme Allied Commander, Europe - commander of NATO's military forces

****	The two Turkish SJGJNT partners are the General Electronic Service (GES), a military

command under the J2 of the Turkish General Staff; and the civilian Electronic and Tectinical
Intelligence (ETI) Directorate of theTurldsh National intelligence Oi^anization (TNIO).

(U//FOUO) TJiis article is reprinted from the Foreign Affairs Digest, December edition.

DYNAMIC PAGE - HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION JS
TOP SECRET // SI tTK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM L-52, DATED OS JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 203201 OS