TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

the effectiveness or efficiency of the resources available to the U.S government and the
SIGINT mission. The DDAP will provide the SIGINTDirector with an annual report on the
tasks so "franchised" over the previous fiscal year, how any recovered resources were
reemployed, and the customer impacts of both.

(U) Goal 3: Annually increase the use of business cases to allocate pay and non-pay dollars and

scarce skills for better returns on investment than alternative ways of using the same resources.6

A. (U//FOUO) Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning in FY08, the chief SIGINT
strategist will identify those skills that, for lack of critical mass, keep us from meaningfully
migrating to new net centric tools and techniques, even if resources arc adequate to expand
existing types of collection, processing, or analysis operations. Prior to each year’s program
build cycle, the chief SIGINT strategist will provide investment portfolio managers and the
SIGINT mission’s senior leadership with an annual list of work roles whose incumbents are
to be considered "scarce resources" for business planning purposes.

II. (U) Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning in FY08, the DDCR and the ADD
SIGDEV will fuse insight into technology and geopolitical trends and then clearly articulate
the prioritized implications for the SIGINT mission. Prior to each year's program build
cycle, the DDCR and the ADD SIGDEV will provide investment portfolio managers with
easily consumable and actionable planning guidance aimed at avoiding technological or
strategic surprise and optimally ordering potential investments.

C. (U) Responsibility and Accountability: Beginning with the FY10-15 program build, the
Collection & Operations, Processing & Exploitation, Analysis & Production, and Mission
Management investment portfolio managers will revalidate or construct new business cases
covering ever larger proportions of their pay and non-pay submissions. As part of each
year's program build cycle, each of the four investment managers will submit business cases
to the SIGINT Director covering more of their portfolio than previous budgets.

I (U) INVESTMENTS-------------------------------------------------------

(U) The national intelligence program allocates pay and non-pay dollars to the SIGINT mission
through seven investment portfolios. As discussed below , the work of each must be tailored for
success in a changing world. Ultimately, desired customer outcomes demand certain operational
concepts and functions. These require sets of personnel and technical capabilities and supporting
infrastructure, all playing the right role at the right time as scripted by system engineering.

ft') Collection and Operations

(TS//SI//REL) Historically, we’ve arrayed independent accesses against various streams of point-
to-point communications. As we shift from intercepting links to exploiting networks though,
multiple collection platforms must be engineered and outfitted to work in concert, and often in
real-time. Vast quantities of message externals and other network metadata must be harv ested.

(U) Such business cases should lake into account national priorities, geopolitical and technology forecasts,
mission assessment data, and defensible cost information.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

7