TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

fact been significant growth in the percentage of customer questions, and especially high priority
ones, that are being at least partially answered by serialized SIGINT reporting.'

‘Band A" Requests
quests

■Band B" Requests
'Band C” Requests

U//FQUQ

03 FY 04 FV Q1 FY G2FY 03 FY Q4 FY Q1 FY Q2FY Q3 FY Q4 FY Q1 FY Q2 FY Q3FY

2004 2004 2006 2005 2005 2006 2006 2006 2006 2006 2007 2007 2007	,	_

insular regimes often

remains at a premium, as is information about asymmetric threats such as weapons of mass
destruction, hostile cyber activities, and some terrorist organizations. Moreover, past gains arc
always under pressure from the relentless evolution of targets and technology.

(TS//SI//REL) For instance, as Internet routing and sendee nodes become more dispersed, some
lucrative SIGINT chokepoints vanish and it takes more access points or ovcr-the-nct operations
to maintain the same coverage. As strong cryptography is applied to identity management,
software attestation, protecting data at rest, and securing network metadata, we must comparably
expand cryptographic enabling, sensitive commercial partnerships, and cryptanalytic processing
capabilities. As users become more mobile and more anonymous, we must introduce new
association and pattern detection technology, lest targets of interest be lost or overlooked.

(S//SLVREL) At the same time, global modernization makes intelligence on economic, political,
and other civil issues more valuable, and relevant targets tend to favor networks. Internet-centric
activities such as e-commerce, e-voting, and on-net industrial and utility control beg to be mined,
even as we expand existing operations against both public and private nets. Mounting interest in
cyber security and the on-line aspects of crime and extremism also spur demand for network
surveillance, as well as more interaction with atypical customers such as state and local
governments, and tighter partnerships with consumers whose own target knowledge can help
steer and interpret collection or whose operations can be "cued" by SIGINT.

(S//REL) Some efforts to recruit, train, and direct Islamic and other extremists are already
entrusted to networks, and so will be many plans and acts of the PRC as it rises to be a near-peer
competitor. Ruling institutions of even rogue states make some use of Internet technology, as do
the scientists and proliferators with which they work. In fact, fewer and fewer targets of any
stripe or location are far removed from a colleague, confidant, or confederate that’s in the know'
and on the net.



(U) "Questions" arc defined here as desired essential elements of information specified in standing
COM I NT or HSINT requirements. They're considered "addressed" when cited in serialized reporting issued during
the quarter.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

3