TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

of the possible" and giving each customer’s own analytic workforce the power and know ledge to
reap, rather than just consume. SIGINT.

(U) Mission Management

(U//FOUO) To optimize ever more complex, fast-moving, cross-access operations, we must
introduce intelligent agent technology that automatically updates tasking and status as it interacts
with technical infrastructure, visualization tools, and authoritative databases. To prevent
strategic surprise, we must track geopolitical and technology trends to identify potential gaps and
mitigate them before mission performance degrades. To accommodate an increased fusion of
SIGINT analysis with customer activities, we must develop new mission management tools that
capture and handle a freer flow of interactions and ncwr forms of support. To pave the way for
more meaningful productivity' estimates and more enlightened investment decisions, we must
instrument collection, processing, and dissemination systems so that sources can be linked
through analysis to customer outcomes.

(I’) Research

(S//S1//REL) Our ability to master global networks and handle previously unimagined volumes
of raw data from both passive and active collection will depend in large part on successful
research. Requirements include ever more powerful methods of knowledge discovery and
management, highly capable software implants and mobile agents, optimal distributed storage
arrangements, and advanced analytic algorithms. Underpinning all this must be high
productivity computing systems and world-leading cryptanalytic talent that can both cope with
pervasive hard encryption and find and exploit meaning in large data sets generalfy. Researchers
must also break new ground in the area of enterprise security management if we're to fully
realize a more interconnected, distributed, and autonomous SIGINT operations fabric and
geographically dispersed analytic collaboration.

(U) Enterprise IT and Enterprise Management

(U//FOUO) New operational strategies and capabilities can't deliver on their promises without
the right military, civilian, and contractor workforce, a modernized enterprise information
technology infrastructure, and an assured 21s' century' physical plant. The quantity and quality of
language analysts, intelligence analysts, mathematicians, and computer network exploitation
specialists are priorities, as is rebuilding the acquisition, system engineering, and
business/project management workforce. Another imperative is modernizing enterprise
networks, platforms, and services; this effort ranges from bandwidth expansion, to server
consolidation and refresh, to introducing user tokens and other information assurance measures.
A third is dealing with long-deferred real property maintenance and the mitigation of long-
simmering power, space, and cooling shortfalls.

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, FVEY//20320108

9