Toward the identity of “Country X” in MYSTIC.

Today Glenn Greenwald released a bombshell, a story more significant than anything in is book, and
probably in the top 5 overall. The NSA is wiretapping the full audio content of everyone in the
Bahamas, a small, stable, peaceful democracy, almost entirely devoid of any threat of terrorism. But
that's just the beginning, NSA as also collecting every single piece of telephony metadata from Mexico,
Philippines, and Kenya, and the full audio content of one additional country, which he chose to redact.

The redaction has caused at least as much controversy than the rest of the story, and has pitted
Wikileaks against the Intercept. With Wikileaks vowing to release the name of country X within 3 days.
Unfounded rumors about Wikileaks having access to Snowden's cache are flying. The sidestory is
threatening to engulf the main story.

It is not necessary to have access to Snowden's cache to identify this country. There is enough existing
data. Let's take a look at the evidence so far.

1)	ACIDWASH

Der Spiegel's book Der NSA Komplex
states that ACIDWASH collects 30-40 million
telephony metadata records per day from
Afghanistan. The slide on the right lists
ACIDWASH as being part off the MYSTIC
program. This affirmatively associates
Afghanistan with the MYSTIC program, but
does not, by itself, establish content collection
in Afghanistan, under MYSTIC. Even though
ACIDWASH collects 30-40 million records per
day, it is responsible for only a handful of
reports.

2)	SCALAWAG

According to documents released by the
Washington Post SCALAWAG is the number 1
provider of actionable SIGINT in “Country X” Slide Associating ACIDWASH with MYSTIC
under MYSTIC and provides access to 30 days worth of audio content. This probably explains why the
chart excludes SCALAWAG, as the number of reports generated from it would render the other bars on
the graph too small to be readable, at the appropriate scale. There is nothing here suggesting the
identity of country X.

3)	The Warning

Both Barton Gellman of the Washington Post and Glenn Greenwald of The Intercept have
chosen to withhold the name of the country based on a warning that they found both credible and
specific. Gellman did not specify the warning, but Greenwald did: it would be likely to provoke
increased violence. Ergo the country is politically unstable, is a region with considerable violence, and
its problems actually matter to the US. This includes a whole host of countries such as Somalia, Yemen,
Pakistan, and Iraq. But the country that bubbles to the top of the list is Afghanistan. We would also like

to get out of Afghanistan, this year. This warning is suggestive, but not conclusive.

4)	The Resume

A SIGINT analyst posted her resume on Indeed.com, this analyst has worked in Afghanistan
extensively, and also used SOMALGET, which is part of MYSTIC. This is suggestive, but not
conclusive.

5)	Length of redaction bars.

The redaction bars are longish. The name
of the country also needs to be long. It just so
happens that “Afghanistan” fits rather well. The
graphic on the right was made by
Electrospaces.net. In light of the other pieces of
evidence, this makes for a compelling case that
Country X is Afghanistan.

6)	Wait minute, aren't there 6 MYSTIC countries?

The Intercept states that there are 5
countries under MYSTIC, 2 with full content
audio, and 3 with full telephony metadata. But the
Washington Post states that there is a sixth
country going online. Can these both be true
simultaneously? It turns out that they can be. The
sixth country was scheduled to be online by
October 2013, which is after Snowden released his trove. Country 6 may or not actually be online at
present. MYSTIC was to provide “Complete access to the additional country's [REDACTED], and
provide retrospective tasking and near real-time access/delivery of metadata as required”

7)	What about Iraq?

A little more than 6 weeks ago Chris Inglis was quoted thus: “the National Security Agency
went from intercepting only about half of enemy signals and taking hours to process them to being able
to collect, sort and make available every Iraqi email, text message and phone-location signal in real
time” Sparking The Intercept to insinuate that Iraq just might be the country under MYSTIC that the
Washington Post refused to name. The answer is complicated: Mystic is about telephony content and
metadata. And Inglis did not mention telephony content. But because he mentioned telephony
metadata, it would still be possible for Iraq to be part of MYSTIC. But the timeline doesn't work, Iraq
cannot be the sixth country, because it went online long ago, and not scheduled for inclusion on
October 2013.

(U) Project Description

(S//SI//REL TO USA, FVEY) The Special Source Operations (SSO) Project provides management oversight
and logistical support to the Special Source Access programs. These resources are used to provide cross-
program management services to drive efficiencies within the Special Source Access Expenditure Center (EC).
Responsibilities include general management, trainirwan^r :tve I. This Project supports the RAMPART-I
program infill uni the RAMPART-X program	h also support' the MYSTIC Program Office,

which leverages partner-enabled accesses against Global System tor Mobile Communications (GSM) and other
cellular and Public Switched Telephone Networks (PSTNs), It supports target technology development through
comprehensive and definitive description of foreign targets' current and future use of telecommunications and
computer systems. Additionally, this Project sustains efforts to add, enhance, and support Next-Generation
Wireless (NOW) capabilities across Special Source Accesses, and efforts to address critical target capability gaps.
This Project contains the Special Source Staff Operations Sub-Project.

(U) Base resources in this project are used to:

•	(U//FOUO) Provide travel, training, equipment and general supplies for the Special Source Access front
office.

•	(TS//SI//REL TO USA, FVEY) Provides initial and emerging access to high-priority SIGINT targets against
new requirements, provide management and technical engineering services to analyze and maintain data
flow, provide program metrics, and manage allocation of tasks and schedules for SSO collection sources.

•	(S//SI//REL TO USA, FVEY) Provide contracted services for NGW core network exploitation capabilities
to deploy core network exploitation capabilities to collection sites inBBlBWBBB Caribbean, Kenya, the
Philippines, and Mexico.

•	(C//REL TO USA, FVEY) Purchase classified SIGINT processing equipment, associated upgrades, and
life-cycle support.

•	(TS//SI//NF) Sustain MYSTl^capabilihes to provide comprehensive metadata access and content against

targeted communications in^H . ’■JCenya. Caribbean, Mexico, and th^MMnpinc^Pmmde new
PSTN o«Ikvtioti cnpithliiv	their internal im)al link' to	m

Capabilities will offer near-real time, complete access to the additional target country's GSM
network(s), and provide for retrospective tasking and near-real-time access/delivety of metadata as required.
Activities previously provided by Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO) resources are now requested
in the base submission.

Image showing that”Afghanistan” fits in the bars

Conclusion: While it is not possible to be 100% certain, it is highly probable that the country omitted
by Greenwald is Afghanistan. Better questions are what is the identify of the sixth country reported in
the Washington Post, what level of access does the NSA have to it - metadata, content, or both? And is
it officially online?

Sources

Der NSA Komplex, published by Der Spiegel

https://firstlook.org/theintercept/2014/03/31/nsa-worlds-blows-top-secret-program/

http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/nsa-surveillance-program-reaches-into-the-
past-to-retrieve-replay-phone-calls/2014/03/18/226d2646-ade9-11e3-a49e-76adc9210f19 story.html

https://firstlook.org/theintercept/article/2014/05/19/data-pirates-caribbean-nsa-recording-every-cell-

phone-call-bahamas/