SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR//20291123

b.	Activities of state and non-state actors (gray arms dealers) in supplying advanced conventional

weapons.

c.	Threats posed by foreign space and counter-space systems: China and Russia
Accepted Risks:

a Weapons and force developments in: Saudi Arabia, and India
b Threats posed by foreign space and counter-space systems India and France

(S//S1) J. MISSION: Emerging Strategic Technologies: Preventing Technological Surprise.

Focus Areas: Critical technologies that could provide a strategic military, economic, or political
advantage: high energy lasers, low energy lasers, advances in computing and information technology,
directed energy weapons, stealth and counter-stealth, electronic warfare technologies, space and remote
sensing, electro-optics, nanotechnologies, energetic materials The emerging strategic technology threat is
expected to come mainly from Russia. China. India, Japan. Germany, France, Korea. Israel, Singapore, and
Sweden.

Accepted Risks: Technological advances and/or basic S&T development on a global basis elsewhere.

(S//S1) K. MISSION: Foreign Policy ((includes Intention of Nations and Multinational Orgs)):
Ensuring Diplomatic Advantage for the I S.

Focus Areas: Positions, objectives, programs, and actions on the part of governments or multilateral
organizations that could significantly impact U.S. national security interests: China, Russia, France,
Germany, Japan. Iran. Israel. Saudi Arabia, North Korea, Afghanistan. Iraq. UN, Venezuela, Syria.
Turkey, Mexico, South Korea, India and Pakistan.

Accepted Risks: Positions, objectives, programs, and actions on the part of governments or multilateral
organizations that could impact U.S foreign policy or security interests: Taiwan.

(S//SI) l~ MISSION: Energy Security: Ensuring a Steady and Reliable Energy Supply for the US.
Focus Areas: Threats to the production and global distributioa'transportation of energy supplies of: Iraq,
Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, Iran, Russia and Nigeria. Accepted Risks: Global impact of the state of energy
industries in: Mexico and China.

(S//SI) M. MISSION: Foreign Intelligence, Counterintelligence; Denial & Deception Activities:
Countering Foreign Intelligence Threats.

Focus Areas: Espionage/intelligence collection operations and mampulation/influence operations
conducted by foreign intelligence serv ices directed against U.S. government, military, science &
technology and Intelligence Community from: China, Russia, Cuba, Israel, Iran, Pakistan, North Korea.
France, Venezuela, and South Korea

Accepted Risks: Espionage/intelligence collection operations against U.S government, military, science
& technology and Intelligence Community from Taiwan and Saudi Arabia

SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA. AUS, CAN, GBR//20291123