SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR//20291123

policy or actions in support of the Iraqi process and to seize the strategic communications initiative.
Accepted Risks: none

(S//S1) D. MISSION: Iran: Enabling policymakers in preventing Iran from achieving its regional
dominance objectives and pursuing policies that impact U.S. global interests. Focus Areas: Provide
U S decision makers with a holistic SIGINT perspective of regional trends and developments, assessing
and/or predicting strategic direction, plans, intentions and capabilities that impact U.S. interests. Assess
Iran's foreign policy trends and leadership intentions that impact U.S. interests or degrade U.S. influence.
Provide warning of Iran's capability to produce a nuclear weapon or its plans to use terrorist surrogates to
attack Israel or U.S. forces and interests Assess the regime's progress in initiatives that enhance its pursuit
of regional power objectives in the political, economic, energy, and religious or ideological arenas
Provide indicators of regime stability and/or susceptibility to democratic reform initiatives Accepted
Risks: Efforts to ascertain the scope of Iran's narcotic&'organized crime elements and economic
stability/influence.

(S//S1) E. MISSION: Russia: Assuring diplomatic and strategic advantage and avoiding critical
surprise. Focus Areas: Provide U.S policy and decision makers with a holistic SIGINT perspective of
developments and trends in Russia, assessing and/or predicting strategic direction, plans, intentions, and
capabilities that impact U S. interests Such analysis must consider Russia's strategic foreign policy and
economic intentions and actions as they pertain to U.S interests and influence in the region and globally;
the strength of Russia's economy and its impact on Russian power projection capability and strategic
positioning; Russia's efforts to regain military strength and stimulate economic growth through the
development and sale of advanced technology and weaponry, and the role ofWMD, organized crime and
counterintelligence in enabling Russian strategic initiatives. Accepted Risks: Certain domestic issues
such as demographics, regional politics, development of civil society in the country, and monitoring of
low-level military training activities. Also, issues that transcend national boundaries such as Russia’s
plans, intentions and capabilities regarding influence on the former Soviet space

(S//S1) F. MISSION: Venezuela: Enabling policymakers in presenting Venezuela from achieving its
regional leadership objectives and pursuing policies that negatively impact U.S. global interests.
Focus Areas: Provide U.S. decision makers with a holistic SIGINT perspective of regional trends and
developments, assessing and/or predicting strategic direction, plans, intentions and capabilities that impact
U.S interests Assess Venezuela's foreign policy trends and leadership intentions that impact U.S
interests or degrade U $ influence Assess Chavez’ progress in his initiatives to pursue regional power
objectives in the political, economic, energy, and ideological arenas Provide indicators of regime
stability, particularly in the energy sector. Assess the depth and breadth of Venezuela's relations with
countries of strategic concern to the United States, particularly Iran, Cuba, China, and Russia. Accepted
Risks: Efforts to ascertain the scope of Venezuela’s narcotics/organizcd crime elements and economic
stabil ity/infl uence.

SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA. AUS, CAN, GBR//20291123