TSP 

 

        
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

eE-eu em 
NSA STAFF PROCESSING FGHM
Te eeHTeeL tee eemeeL 
eletwr the 35% ?e {p 
teen 

a - I-tee 
EUBJEBT Requirements fer . I sleMATuf-tE 
et CUE at Texas, Genrgie and Heweii Le i ELEMENT SUSPENSE
NEH. end FBI Ftee meteriel. . :3 -

5mm?? 

 

 

PURPQSE: Te ehtein SID eppretrel fer end Eeeteitet'ien 
eryptenelyete et the thelegie Gentere {Gfle} in Geergte, end Hewett, whe ere
under dirert DIRNSA eetherity, te end NEE. SIGINT PISA end (IT FBI SIGINT
PISA dete thet ie etered in in SEE et NSAW. Thie will eet precedent fer te NBA
F1351 teeteriel euteide ef NSAW.

BAGKGRUUND: Ae pert ef' etretegj,F fer the Extended Enterpriee huildeut,
eryptenetyeie efferte at the eryeteleeie eentere in Tet-tee, Geergie, end Hewe'ii wilt eewe ee
eeteneiene ef the erypte nelyeie perfermed (IRS in the Uffiee ef Target
Pureeit?e eepleitetien hrenehee {83} 1-42, 531143, 531131, and 531133) at NBAW. ?neiyete et the
cry?ptelegic eentere w'ili pert ef eirtn e1 teem with NSAW enelyete. The}:r will dete
thet ie etered within the IDES ?rewell end wilt eryptenetjttie end tee'le, elee within
the ?re-well, by way efe ?ii?FM eepehilitj," thet eneuree thet ie not eernpretnieed end
that the tlete end teele eennet get eut te the netwerk. The prierttiee ef eryptenelytie
nneeiene wilt eentinee te he eet in eenjunetien with elemente et NSAW end the ClTpiUl?giC
{Zentere ee epprepriete.

 

   




     
   
  
 
   
 
  
  
   
 

 

EFFEGE  MME AND 

AND Elle-TE 

12:2  

Ettle?tl? 1
meme:




elree

    

 

 

 

 



PHEIHE {Secure} DATE 

June QUDE
CLAEEIFIEATEUH

 

 

 

 

 

Fe?i eet .
95 her FM: t?jz 
Emit 23 Hmmb? mm HEEL 0H: my] 123 TDP 115

111.



Heuc (e

 

TOP 
S3 109?080~06

at the centers will access data that is stored in the following
databases at NSAW:

FOURSCORE fax and DNI data, some of which is NSA or FBI FISA?derived

ZAP text, some of which is NSA or FBI NSA-derived

CAPRICORN - voice, some of which is SA or FBI NSA-derived

SOAPOPERA voice, end product, SR1 information, some of which is NSA or FBI FISA~derived

These databases contain raw data, including enciphered collection, and, when exploitation
is possible, plain text. Some of the data in the databases is NSA FlSA-derived or FBI CT
FISA~derived While not every database contains FISA-derived material, it is reasonable to expect
that at the CCs will perform mission with agility, moving across targets and databases as
mission demands, and that sometimes that will mean accessing data Within a database that does
contain FISA?derived data. Access to these databases is restricted to who hold the
RAGTIME ECI, have a specific ?need to know? about the data stored Within the databases, and who
are authorized by the data owner. For some years CES has been the recipient of improperly
marked/classi?ed data but all have been and are aware that data marked with the SIGAD
U8984J and case notation is FBI FISA data, and that all other data marked with SIGAD
is NSA FISA data. CES believes that the appropriate remedy is to correct the
classification of the data before it is fed into our systems. This is an ongoing issue which should not
impede the approval of this SPF but the matter should be addressed. CES will ensure that all
accessing these databases know that data marked with the SIGAD U3984J and case
notation is FBI data, and that all other data marked with SIGAD is NSA
FISA data, and that this data should be classi?ed TOP - ECI 

OFORN . Ideally all FISA and material should be held separately, and FBI and NSA
FISA should be partitioned by individual target. The Of?ce of Oversight and Compliance will work
with S3 data?ow and Special Source Operations to correct the markings/classi?cation of data at the
front end.

CES at NSAW will work to ensure that all individuals working the mission at
the CC3 have the appropriate clearances for access to sensitive data, including RAGTIME, and will
dictate speci?c policy and procedural security measures.

REQUIREMENTS: Following recent meetings and discussions among SID Oversight
and Compliance (SV) and NSAW CES, the following are recommendations and requirements that
CBS and the Centers should agree to implement prior to accessing, handling,
processing, retaining, and disseminating NSA FISA and CT FBI FISA?derived collection.

SV requirements: TX, GA, and HI should commit to:

l) The creation of a permanent FISA coordinator position, to be staffed initially by a
person experienced with FISA procedures, to ensure compliance with FISA minimization
procedures; build a culture and climate of FISA awareness; and facilitate on-site ability to train,
?eld questions, and handle time-sensitive FISA issues.

TX has identi?ed a permanent FISA coordinator; however that
person has no FISA experience. The CBS Mission Manager at TX, who has FISA experience, must
perform oversight of CES activities and must participate in the new coordinator?s FISA training.
SID Oversight Compliance will brief both individuals on their responsibilities.

TOP INT 123

'r?P 123
sales-escec

NSAHCSS GA and HI have permanent FISA ceerdinaters whe
have been supperting the Ceunterterrcrism analytic missien. GEE must werk with these persens te
ensure eversight ei CBS activities. The FISA will ensure censistent FISH eversight
acress all 1Center activities.

2} The creatien et" a cere FlSe werkferce which. at all times, centains a stable hotly cf
persennel whe ideally have at least ene year?s experience werlting PISA. A stable, nee?transient
werkf'erce ensures a well-feunded culture fer FISH, as has been established at ever many
years. Such a culture minimises the number ef FISA~related vielatiens by reinfereing the
requirements. restrictiensz. and sensitivities cf accessing and FISA.

The Missien Managers at Texas, Geergia. and Hawaii have F1315.
eaperience and will have supervisery ever all GEE enieleyees at these sites. GEE
will ensure that all at Texas, Geergia, and Hawaii will be trained en hew te perferm
the GEES missien and en hew te handle sensitive materials; all will he ltnewledgeahle aheut USSID
SPHERE and Annex a that describes F1349: handling.

3} Previde and decumentatien that the en?site physical 1aycut ef
terminals and the means in secure the FISA material is such that access is restricted te enly
eieared persennel with a need fer access te the FISA data.

Seating fer individuals eerierming the missien will be clustered
tegether te ensure that they have visual and aceusticai privacy fer technical cenversatiens and te
ensure that their cenversatiens and the data displayed en their cemputer screens is neither
accessible ner viewahie by these whe de net have the apprepriate clearances and a ?need?tevlrnew?.
In additien, these individuals will have ene er mere dedicated printers and eernhinatien safes fer
sterage at any autherised FISH material.

4} Previde assurances that FIEA material will net he revealed er disseminated as part
cf site hrieiings er demenstratiens, er in any ether fermat. unless it centerms te and is handled in
accerdanee with El?n Genrt requirements and minimisatien precedures apereved by the Atterney
General, and NBA. disseminatien and precedures. Due in the sensitivity at the senrees and
metheds used te ehtain this celleetien, it eannet he shared with site visiters er ether uneleared
[Jersennel witheut preper minimisatien and attrihutien te pretect these seerces and metheds.

3G0 reg uirements:
Eacept in eaigent circumstances. all persennel that will have access te F183 material sheuld
receive initial USSID and FBI FISA minimisatien brie?ngs in persen- The briefings
given by UGC are interactive in nature and the psi-sens] setting gives a better eppertunity is

interest with all TIWhen in persen briefings are net pessihle, brie?ngs will he clerie via
UTE.

RECHMMEHEATEGN: Sl?li?i'l' DIR uencur an access with eversighi as 

SIGINT 

 

 

 

 



SEC RETI EC HG FU 213291 123

'l't ll? lh?l attainsMPLJAH 

a REL-pest 
TU: {if} i'Jiteelt'rt

Reenmmended thuimtitellts fer at
at Tesas. {Jeerpia and tn- SSH and FBI
tilde material.

fl WEI: This [salute-l. will sit; precedent as rte print request
Fer access in title little. nit-lentil eelside 3?4th" tuss- been
NSA t-?li-b?t is Sl?lh'l' derived fruit] HSA's eivn
[e the US Fit-lat {feta-1. the individual in 
and {Slit}. in a pcrsenally swern
declaratien tn the US Ceun. assures the t?cun that a_li
individuals, wherever Iii-eaten and in {linguist
erytp-analysl. repertcr. celleeter, etc-]- whe aeress er use NSA
l?lliv?t tit-Martial are trained and will with all NSA
ehligatiens attached te this sensitive access.

[Pa-3'3? 1il-I'hile S?s? supperts the huiltl eut tn the
Centers in prineiple. S?v' has Jeantetl that there are
en's-ring de?ciencies in elassitieatieu and handling ei'l?tS?t
and FBI HSA tltaterit-Il in databases ti1a1 must he
addressed and tired hethte addilienal access at the its is
apprevcd.

ll la vital that beth Hiir'i. HERE. and FBI FISH. material
he prepe'tly and separately identi?ed an that users eflhat

material ltrlew than they are aceessinp ass FISH er FlS?t.

and 3} NSA. ean remain in eeniplienee with Elli-.partntent ei?

.iu slice and all ulher nhligatitn'ls Iiil? lilSi't handling and
tninitntratien- it is missihle that there are already l-?lSi?t
vielctiecs resulting fl'?'l'l?l the any data has been stercd in these
databases and iT is entice] that these pmhlen'is he ?red helbtr:
the prehlerns are. spread In new HMEW I L,

title-J 
?edged} DI 

TDP SEC 1 1'3

 

 

TDF SEC H'ft??lill 13

Fer example, the databases and Lil?
remain hath hSi?t His. and Fill that dees early lhe
apprepriate classi?catien {all NSA. and F131 material
must tarry the Ii"
ii?l FISH. sheuld else he marl-ted with the
DUC-appreved Flii i?lSdt bsmterJ. Further, NSA FISH and
FBI Inatcrials are mixed lettether within the databases.
despite the differences in tulle-wed retentiun t-e1ween the live
versiens ef and hell] are united with rien-FlSri
material. sheuld she preside 315 with art SUP elanlyirlp
hew access {by heth Eh? and SE target In these
target felder is maintained. inelutliilg what sheet-is are re
place tn verify user cleantnees In view NSA. FISH. andr'er PHI
material.

If yeu suppert access in principle. weeld
recnmmend that up aetien be tat-ten re establish aceeunts at the
{311's fer these ICES databases S?v? can ensure that the
issues ef partitieninp. and ancess are reached
and any existing access e: retetitien vieiatiens are
identi?ed and cleared tlp.

t'l'Si?aSl] Further, Sh' tceenmnentls 1hat this access net he
appeared until SMCES ruid the |Centers invelved
ceerdinste with the ef?ces that spensered the HSs?t PISA
entut and :lgl'e?t: 1c the respensihilities that each will
have relative in satisfying the FiSi't minimiza'tien 
Sl'lil? til, nan-ea at}. This is necessary in en's-titre that
all individuals who teach HSi't FISH material persenally
abide by Kittie FISH. handling and minintiralten
requirements, ensure that he use makes errettceus
assutnptiens what anether nf?ee is deittg 1via-arias
meeting these requirements- and ensure that the NSA.
deelatant can swear under eath that NSA abides by its
ebligntiens.

 

?1131? SEC 3.23

