 Make First-Ever 1ifisnil; tn Cullectinn Site in
Schiinin 211, German}?

FROM:
Joint SIGINT Activity 
Run Date: IDES HEDGE

 

(U) im pr?9339d with Software them 03.

 

luf?

Thic Summer 
and lcint SIGINT Activity reprecentativec, alcng with

Geunterterrcricm 521, became the i'lrct US vicitcrc at a
Eundecnachrichtendienct* ccllecticn cite lccated in 
Germany.

During thece vicitc, END cenicr cite managerc and previded
hriei'lngc en their miccicn, cite manning, technical capahilitiec, ac well ac current
and advanced analytic and techniguec. Thece vicitc in June and July previded
incightc intc the ccllecticn, prececcing, and analytic capahilitiec, and
the clcce technical partnerchip hetween JSA and the END.

Eefcre the reuni?caticn cf Germany, {lccated en the
farmer Eact-Wect German harder} ccllected Eact German radar, radic, and
micrcwave ccmmunicaticnc. When Germany reunii'led in 1000, END at
were ferced ta recreate their rule and miccicn. did cc
prciudly, and new playc a key rule in the Geunterterrcricm and Farce
Pretecticn hy ccllecting mchile ccmmunicaticn cyctemc {cpecii'lcally
Thuraya, INMARSAT, and 

Tcday, ic manned with apprecimately 100 There

 

fecuc en develcpment and prcducticn cfvcice
and faccimile traf?c ccllected Thuraya, and GSM. 
ccllectc ever 400,000 Thura a cutc er da 14,000 INNLARSAT cutc and 0,000 GEM
cutc hath the
E-mail ic alcc ccllected at cite, with an average at 02,000 ccllectc per day.
NSA henei'ltc thic ccllecticn, ecpecially the Thuraya interceptc 

which the END charec an a daily hacic.

 

Site and linguictc are fer evaluating ccllected
traf?c, tranccrihing vcice cutc and ferwarding raw cutc en ta their HQS fer further
evaluaticn and reperting. Tc their ccllecticn and SIGDEV capabilitiec, cite
engineerc have develcped ceveral cyctemc ta END call-chaining
capahilitiec, data-viewing cf vcice and far-r. data, and data-ferwarding ta END HQS.
Develcpment at a ?eld cite are unucual fer END, and it wac interecting tc
learn ahcut thece cn-cite 

The ceccnd vicit hy JSA and NSA Headguarterc reprecented
the i'lrct technical exchange with END US were ceveral
END analytic teal cuitec, came at which were under develcpment. END 

Enid

ceftware develeperc and ceught regular feedback en the utility efthece
teelc and techniguec. Thece teel cuitec, cuch ac MIRA 4, integrate multiple
databace analytic functienc [cuch ac viewing veice and lictening te fact}, much like
NSA Headguarterc hac UIS [Ucer Integrated Servicec}. In ceme wayc, thece teelc
have featurec that curpacc US SIGINT capabilitiec. Ameng a ceriec efinterecting
itemc, NSA neted that END ceuld ceamleccly meve frem UERAS
[call-chaining ceftware} te the acceciated veice cutc. END a_lce
perfermed geelecatienal celectien efmebile cemmunicantc. Fer inctance, they
ceuld define any particular geegraphical area, like and celect any
cemmunicant that dwelled in that area fer ceveral minutec.

END develeperc a_lce demenctrated a ceftware pretetype
that ucec Secial Netwerk Analycic againct metadata te diccever and
accecc target greupc ameng ether thingc, leeking fer infermatien flew. The geal [at
leact in part} wac te meniter thece targetc in the backgreund within analyct-cet
parameterc, with alertc te netify the analyct when any anemaleuc meacurement
appeared, and petentially te cteer frent-end cellectien. They claimed te have ceme
cucceccec en cmall greupc en which they had geed cellectien.

They ceemed interected in a_lce characterizing mevement patternc en
geeceerdinatec te find percenc cuch ac ceurierc [terrerlct er etherwice}, then ucing
that characterizatien fer SIGDEV diccevery purpecec and predictive [trend]:
analycic. END a_lce chewed uc that they are interected net enly in celectien baced
en mevement patternc er netwerk ctructurec, but a_lce in hardware changec. They
uced a variety [cuch ac fuzzy legic} te diccever thece patternc. The
END recpended pecitively te reguect fer a cepy and UERAS
ceftware, and made ceveral reguectc frem NSA cencerning target and teel
develepment and data.

Thic ceriec ef meetingc reprecentc a new level efengagement fer
and itc German partner. We hepe that thic dialegue centinuec, and makec each
partner mere capable cemmen SIGINT reguirementc.

 

Netec:
END Federal Intelligence Service

Thic article ic reprinted frem the Foreign A?hirc Digect, September
editien.

Sefc

4ef4

