TOP TO USA, FVEY

National Security Agency April 2013
Central Security Service

Information Paper

 

(U) Subject: NSA Intelligence Relationship with New Zealand
(U) Executive Summary

relationship with New Zealand is supportive and cooperative. New
Zealand?s Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) highly values its
relationship with and will continue to seek and support mutually beneficial
efforts that demonstrate its commitment to national and international security through its
foreign partnerships, in spite of budget and other resource challenges.

GCSB is New Zealand?s operational lead on the cyber threat, giving it impetus
to be an active participant in the global tipping and cueing architecture as well as
resources and capabilities to contribute to Five Eyes efforts. GCSB continues to be
especially helpful in its ability to provide NSA ready access to areas and countries that
are difficult for the United States to access. Mr. Ian Fletcher, GCSB Director since
February 2012, faced his first major challenge when GCSB came under investigation for
allegedly exceeding its authority when assisting New Zealand law enforcement. The
review that followed made several recommendations, some already underway, to
strengthen compliance program.

(U) Key Issues

GCSB recently gained agreement to roll out a single TOP SECRET
network across the New Zealand government with all agencies? TOP SECRET
networks collapsing into a single domain. As part of a strategic decision to
collocate intelligence functions, the New Zealand Secret Intelligence Service
(NZSIS) will move into the new building recently occupied by GCSB with GCSB
providing the infrastructure support.

 

 

1 AFSC - Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States

Derived From: 1-52
Dated: 20070108
Declassify On: 20340501
TOP TO USA, FVEY

TOP TO USA, FVEY

 

(U) What NSA Provides to Partner

NSA provides raw traffic, processing, and reporting on targets of mutual
interest, in addition to technical advice and equipment loans.

(U) What Partner Provides to NSA

GCSB provides collection on China, Japanese/North
Korean/Vietnamese/South American diplomatic communications, South Pacific Island
nations, Pakistan, India, Iran, and Antarctica; as well as, French police and nuclear
testing activities in New Caledonia.

 
 

(U) Success Stories



 

GCSB is a charter member of SIGINT Seniors Pacific a group
comprising national SIGINT agency leaders from ten countries with interests in the
Pacific Region. GCSB completed its 2-year term as chair of both the SSPAC Executive
Board and Analytic Working Group in 2012. During its tenure, GCSB secured active
participation in the forum from previously silent partners, garnered unprecedented high
levels of participation in analytic sessions, and secured a relationship
between SSPAC and SIGINT Seniors Europe 

(U) ProblemsIChallenges with the Partner

GCSB continues to focus and invest its limited resources on the highest
New Zealand national priorities, with the recent compliance review consuming
much of its resources and attention over the past six months. highest
priority, cyber, will be developed to meet the demands of the New Zealand
government and Five Eyes partners. NSA will continue to encourage 
efforts towards technical interoperability.

 

2 SSPAC - Australia, Canada, France, India, Korea, New Zealand, Singapore, Thailand, United Kingdom,
and United States

3 SSEUR - Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom and United States

TOP TO USA, FVEY 2

TOP TO USA, FVEY

Prepared by: 

Foreign Affairs Directorate
Country Desk Officer, New Zealand

TOP TO USA, FVEY

