TOP SECRET STRAPI COMTNT
The maxin classi?cation allowed on GCWiki is TOP SECRET COMINT. Click to report inappropriate content.
ForGCWiki help Contact: Support page

 

Open Source for Cyber Defence/Progress

From GCWiki
0 en ource for er Defence
Jump to: navigation, search

 

Many structured datasets are now available in the HAPPY database. Unstructured datasets are being worked on and will go to L1 LVELY H1 LRSE. Other integration with 2 FAQ and is in place, and more will come to QRE.

Contents

Data girrently galliered

2 Future ones to work on

0 2.1 Vulner?ilitl Intelligence
0 2 2 
0 2.3 Miscellaneous

[edit] Data currently gathered

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OPP-LEG In HAPPY In LOVELY In In TWO
Data source Nature of the data Status ZooL? Update frequency
alexacom Top domains list; has previously been used to find popular social networking sites in foreign countries to help with analyst investigations. Approved Automatic updates on daily basis
user-agents.org User agent strings, useful for finding spoofed or malicious entries Approved Manual update
Access to hashes of known COTS files (for Manual update every three months
free scrape)
Ww'maxm?m'mm (ASN Used to help map out ranges of networks being monitored. (for Manual update on best endeavours basis
list) free scrape)
ZeusTracker.abuse.ch Zeus specific malware tracking including IPs, binaries and domains to be used by the e-crime team. Approved Automatic updates on hourly basis
SpyEyeTracker.abuse.ch SpyEye specific malware tracking including IPs, binaries and domains to be used by the e-crime team. Approved Automatic updates on hourly basis
amadaabuse.ch Useful for declassifying information about known malicious [Ps and domains. Approved Automatic updates on hourly basis
TOR consensus document, useful for identifying whether a target was using TOR and the status of the individual nodes. Approved Automatic updates on hourly basis
. . . Approved (for .
Snort rules used for network monitoring purposes Free data) Manual updates on best endeavours basis
PremiumDro com Dail newl re istered domains to alert anal to sus icious domains worth investi atin for malicious activi A roved currently unavailable' Head to ?nd covert access
method for paid content
verisign.com updates of newly registered domains to alert to suspicious domains worth investigating for malicious activity Approved
MalwareDomainList.com General malware tracking resource Approved Currently one-off sample
twin? com Real-time alerting to new security issues reported by known security professionals, or planned activity by hacking groups e.g. Anonymous. For more information about the A mved Prototype currently running. For more
sources currently being brought into the building see source list on the LOVELY HORSE wiki PP information see LOVELY HORSE
conmgioMiniDumP?com Most recommended blog by CD0 Highly regarded for malware analysis relevant to APT investigations. Can be useful to declassify information for reporting purposes Appmved
metasploitcom Access to new zero-day exploits for the malware team to analyse (for
free data)
exploit-db.com Access to an archive of exploits and vulnerable so?ware. Exploits from submittals and mailing lists collected into one database. Approved
(Inmm? Storm Already used by GovCertUK on a daily basis for timely and relevant security news and incident reporting. Approved Currently updated on best endeavours basis
Approved
POSITIVE PONY address to company and sector mapping. See the POSITIVE PONY wiki page for more details. (dev) Currently a static data set
pending
NETPLATE Multiple data Wes - details will be included on this page when releasable
POSITIVE PONY screenshots.)
[gm] Future ones to work on
Knowimge Available from Update Filtering Volumetrics Comments
required frequency
. . . . . . . . . NSA's FOXTRAIL is in this space,
i From the Passive Sigint system, or buy from Rle (Regional Internet Registenes)? Or can we find another way of getting all updates copied to us? What about NSA Or our own GeoFusion? And there now REFRIED CHICKEN don know:
whois . . . . . . . . . . . every few dont and needs more checks to see
?om It?s a database ofpassively intercepted domain WHOIS records, searchable by any word in the record. Since Feb 2011. There are legal and policy constraints which mean you cannot search domains, or terms Within records, ask the . . .
records that may be sensitive on grounds oflocation or nationality without appropriate authorisation. Ifyou would like an account please let me know. Access to the data relies on having a Global Surge Account.") days know Whemer ism sumble' And
GeoFusion (poc: 
recent Nady NSA's is in this ace
domain maybe an analytic run against the main DNS records to find the new domains -- or is there a more definitive source? morning and ?(men very small and [lng more Checks to 
. . Companies like Cyveillance are able to obtain feeds ofnew domain registrations (for 'brand monitoring', so Iimagine we'd be able to get hold of something 09:51, 7 September 2011 (BST) a?emoon (MB) . . 
registrations ,ghi?sw whether it isnt suitable
Site Type of data Legal status
An increasing number of tip-offs are coming from the Pastebin website, as this is where many hackers anonymously advertise and promote their exploits, by publishing stolen information. An automated, regular search (say, NOT APPROVED: This nature of this site means that it would be very difficult to demonstrate
Pastebin weekly) across Pastebin for certain keywords such as .gov.uk or GSI or HMG etc. would be very valuable to ensure that GovCertUK is always notified if any information that they need to be concerned about appears in the proportionality of scraping the whole site to identify the small proportion of information that
open source. "30-11-2011 GovCertUK briefed about an attack on a UN server. This tip came from open source and specifically from Pastebin where the stolen emails and passwords had been posted online." would be ofvalue to CD0 and therefore approval cannot be given for scraping of the site.
OVAL List forNDR to feed into HIDDEN SPOTLIGHT vulnerability database APPROVED
Afraid or This lists domains which are publically available for anyone to add a sub-domain to. CD0 have suggested that this should be another resource they check alongside whois and robtex when
investigating a domain.
Joe Stewart's
blog for Dell
secure this regularly includes SNORT rules and other information that can be signatiired. APPROVED
Works
?34:35?. request APPROVED
mailing list
[edit] Vulnerability Intelligence
. . Update . . .
Knowledge required Available from Filtering Volumetrics Comments
frequency
by mm? names 0f know? very small Current work is BIRD SEED. JTRIG's provides the scraping already but only for handfuls ofIDs and doesn't repeat. The tweets requires data mining. Experiment run by CDT for NDR
twitter traffic for vulnerabilities use twitter API in standard way hourly? malware/Vulnerability . 
using Cyber Cloud, and has OPP-LEG approval already.
researchers
. . direct web scrape (if allowedcertain blogs and CERT web Sites MH 0 INT 3 e; have howl 9 1m 0? game may as small (GB) ISA have previously run several contracts looking at this problem, With aview to delivery tog NE. Final wrap up work is scheduled to automate the derivation rules (see TR-FSP) from open
for vulnerabihties examples? Fag source information such that machines matching those rule (vulnerabilities) can be found in passive. Wanted by NDR POLLS) and See 0 en source vulrier 111 sources.
"limin  ?hatrooms for (?130th access (if allowed) hourly? by list of speci?c RC5 V?sma?ll NB: Assume will include some IRCs. Wanted by Maybe a MARBLE POLL source.
vu nera i 
certain CERT email lists for v.small . . . . .
. . . irect reception hourly? by list of specific mailing lists NB. Assume Will include some email (including PGP). Wanted by Maybe a MARBLE POLL source.
vulnerabihties (MB)
Commits to open source code some code {0.6m
repositories and security patch GitHub etc. daily? y?l? 1? small (GB) Requested by NDR 
. presumab 
check-ins
Emerging Threats 'Open' 2:530:13 SHORTFALL Daily? By updated Snort rules Approval granted from OP-LEG to scrape info.

[eLit] Bulk Infrastructure Data

Knowledge required Available from Update Filtering Volumetrics Comments
frequency
known . . . several SpamHaus import is already an exploit-level service from ITServices. TR-CISA have just completed an initial study ofopen sources of this sort of information, with an initial delivery ofsample data
malware/bot/spam e.g' SpamHaus 13100.1( liSts' DNS bleak 115's (dmbl'abuse'Ch)' DNS blaCkhOImg times a none small (GB) to CD0. Longer term, we can set up an automated service to fetch this regularly from the Internet, although initially we will use JTRIG irifrastnictiire. Some directly requested by CD0 via
lists (malwaredomainlistcom), Drive-by downloads (blade-defender.org) etc.
servers/orbs/relays 
. several
. eg, Clean MX and perhaps Google's Safe Browsing API . . .
known good could be used (see 10 em ages a none small (GB) Directly requested by CD0 via 
known ORB servers from sources eg, GhostNet daily none Eagfmall idea from CDO
[edit] Miscellaneous
. . Update . . .
Knowledge required Available from thering Volumetrics Comments
frequency
UK address to protect need to find out how we get them at the weekly? ?one small (GB) apparently got complete list of.gov.uk domains via JANET in June 2011. trawled KED (and therefore probably Akamai whois data) to find some List 
moment. network info.
strings, sources, and expected frequency r) weekly? ?one small (GB) SEE Agent prowtwe by OfWide? imam?-
Malware development and hacking techniques being requires covert monitoring of forums weekly? CKX currently working w1th E-cnme to identify and evaluate forums ofpotential interest. This project may extend to active monitoring ofand reporting on discussions in selected forums.

discussed in forums CKX Ops Manager is 
POC: 
POC: (mil
POC: (mil
Retrieved from 
Categories: Cyber Defence Open Source Information

Views

0 Page



 

Additional tatistics

Personal tools

0M

REDACTED
talk

My preferences
My watchlist
My contributions

Navigation

Main Page

Help Pages
Wikipedia Mirror
Ask Me A ouL..
Random page
Recent changes
Report a Problem
Contacts


Search

Toolbox

What links here
Related changes
Upload ?le
Special pages
Printable version

Permanent link

This page was last modified on 25 June 2012, at 09:42.

This page has been accessed 640 times.

All material is UK [http://ww

GCHO on 01242 221491 X30306 or a i anviik
Privagy policy

About GCWiki

Discla'mers

TOP SECRET STRAPI COMTNT
The maxin classi?cation allowed on GCWiki is TOP SECRET COMINT. Click to report inappropriate content.

Crown Copvrightl 2008 or is held under licence from third parties. This information is exempt under the Freedom Act 2000 (FOIA) and mav be exempt under otherUK information legislation. Refer anv FOIA queries to

