(TS//SI//NF) New FAA702 Certification in the Works - Cyber Threat
By	on 2012-03-23 1423

(TS//SI//NF) NSA has drafted a new FAA702 Certification to target
Cyber Threats. It is close to being ready for formal coordination
with Department of Justice and the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence. If approved by the FISA Court, likely many
months from now, the Certification will enable analysts to task
selectors to SSO's FAA702 authorized systems (PRISM, STORMBREW,
OAKSTAR, FAIRVIEW, BLARNEY) which do not fit into one of the current
Certifications for Foreign Intelligence. This will be of great
benefit to NTOC because it will fill a targeting gap - some cyber
threat actors are currently targeted under the existing
Certifications when the actor is known and can be tied to a foreign
government or terrorist organization. However, many cyber threat
targets currently cannot be tasked to FAA702 due to lack of
attribution to a foreign government or terrorist organization. The
new certification will not require this attribution, and rather only
require that a selector be tied to malicious cyber activity. The
FAA702 collection will then be used to determine attribution, as
well as perform collection against known targets.

(TS//SI//NF) The Certification will also for the first time spell
out the authorization for targeting cyber signatures such as IP
addresses, strings of computer code, and similar non-email or phone
number-based selectors. Although the current Certifications already
allow for the tasking of these cyber signatures, NSA and its FAA702
overseers (e.g. - Dept. of Justice; ODNI) have yet to reach a common
understanding as to how this unique type of targeting and collection
will be implemented. This new Certification will help to codify the
FISA Court's guidance on targeting using the signatures listed
above. SSO's “upstream" FAA702 accesses will perform collection
against all signature types and are poised to make immediate
significant contributions. The PRISM access will be used primarily
for e-mail and similar selector types. Taken together, SSO's FAA702
collection will fill a huge collection gap against cyber threats to
the nation, and the approval of this new Certification is one of the
DIRNSAs highest priorities.

POCsi^HHIBB PRISM Mission Program Manager, S3531,
^^^^^^^SOCyber Lead, S3531;