IN THE EUROPEAN COURT
OF HUMAN RIGHTS

PRIVACY INTERNATIONAL

- and -

THE UNITED KINGDOM

SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPLICANT TO ACCOMPANY
THEIR APPLICATION FORM * (ii)

INTRODUCTION............................................................2

STATEMENT OF THE FACTS [Box E]..........................................2

(i)	Background — GCHQ and the Applicant..............................2

(ii)	The refUsal of Privacy international’s request for information from GCHQ.3

(iii) The reason for the GCHQ refusal decision.................................5

(iv) The aims of Privacy International in requesting the information from GCHQ.6

(v)	Summary of the Facts.............................................8

STATEMENT OF ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF THE CONVENTION
AND RELEVANT ARGUMENTS [Box F]..........................................9

(i)	Interference with the right of access to information under Article 10.9

(ii)	Whether the interference was justified.........................14

(iii)	Article 13....................................................17

1

INTRODUCTION

1.	This document provides the submissions of the Applicant in the
above matter, organised according to the Application Form.

STATEMENT OF THE FACTS [Box El

(i) Background — GCHQ and the Applicant

2.	The Government Communications Headquarters (“GCHQ”) is an
intelligence service of the United Kingdom Government, operated
under the control of a Director appointed by the Foreign Secretary.1

3.	The Applicant, Privacy International, is a UK registered charity. It
was founded in 1990 as the first organisation to campaign at an
international level on privacy issues. The organisation’s mission is to
defend the right to privacy across the world, and to fight unlawful
surveillance and other intrusions into private life by governments and
corporations. Privacy International routinely publishes its research in
reports and analyses. It engages in a wide range of public debate on
these issues.

4.	Recent cases brought by Privacy International include a challenge to
the lawfulness of the surveillance practices of Britain’s security
services (Privacy International v The Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs and Ors) 2 and a judicial review related to the
export of surveillance technologies by a British company to 1 2

1	Intelligence Services Act 1994ss3(1), 4(1). The Intelligence Services Act 1994
provides the statutory basis for GCHQ and sets out that its functions are (a) to
monitor or interfere with electromagnetic, acoustic and other emissions and any
equipment producing such emissions and to obtain and provide information derived
from or related to such emissions or equipment and from encrypted material; and (b)
to provide advice and assistance about—(i) languages, including terminology used for
technical matters, and (ii) cryptography and other matters relating to the protection
of information and other material, to, inter alia, the armed forces or the United
Kingdom Government.

2	IPT/13/92/CH

2

repressive regimes in Bahrain and Ethiopia (R (on the application of
Privacy International) —and— The Commissioner for HM Revenue and Custom)?

5.	Privacy International also regularly intervenes as a third party in this
Court, for example in the cases of S. & Marper v United Kingdom/
Hannes Tretter and Others v Austria,5 * Ringler v Austria5 and Sultan
Sher and Others v United Kingdom.7

(ii) The refusal of Privacy international’s request for information
from GCHQ

6.	On 4 March 2014 Privacy International wrote to Sir Iain Lobban, the
Director of GCHQ, making the following request:

‘Pursuant to section 1 of the Freedom of Information Act 2000, we kindly
request copies of any and all records consisting of or relating to:

1)	An organisational chart(s) of the departments within GCHQ.

2)	The number of people who work for GCHQ, broken down by
departmental classifications that GCHQ uses in its normal course of
business.

3)	The current menu and price list for any restaurants, canteens, cafes or
other food service providers that operate within any GCHQ controlled
building.

4)	Copies of all indoctrination declarations, official secrets act
declarations, oaths, or other declarations GCHQ employees sign to receive
confidential information.

5)	A hierarchical list of the levels of security clearance and/or levels of
access to classified information in use by GCHQ.

6)	Documents describing the process and requirements a person must
fulfill in order to obtain each level of security clearance and/or access to
classified information, including but not limited to, counter-terrorism check,
security check and developed vetting.

7)	The number of people working for GCHQ who have obtained,
respectively, each level of security clearance and/or access to classified

3

4

5

6

7

[2014] EWHC 1475 (Admin)

(Application Nos: 30562/04 and 30566/04)
(Application No. 3599/10)

(Application No. 29097/08)

(Application No. 5201/11)

3

information, including but not limited to counter-terrorism check, security
check and developed vetting

8)	Documents, internalpolicies, or memoranda provided to new GCHQ
employees regarding the legality of actions undertaken by GCHQ.

9)	Documents provided to GCHQ employees setting out ways in which
employees can raise concerns regarding the legality or ethical nature of
activities undertaken by GCHQ.

10)	Documents provided to GCHQ employees relating or regarding
compliance with the Official Secrets Act.

11)	Documents provided to GCHQ employees relating to compliance with
section 4(2)(b) of the Intelligence Services Act 1994 (ISA).

12)	Between 2000 and the present, the number of warrants issued
pursuant to RIPA on which GCHQ has relied to carry out its activities,
broken down by year and by the section of RIPA that authorised the
warrant.

13)	Between 1994 and the present, the number of warrants issued
pursuant to the ISA on which GCHQ has relied to carry out its activities,
broken down by year and by the section of the ISA that authorised the
warrant.

14) A document index, including document title and number of pages, or
similar inventory provided to the Interception of Communications
Commissioner pursuant to the requirements of the Regulation of
Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (RIPA) section 58.

15) A document index, including document title and number of pages, or
similar inventory provided to the Intelligence Services Commissioner pursuant
to the requirements of the RIPA section 60.

16)	Number of instances, broken down by year, when the Director of
GCHQ has refused to disclose information to the Intelligence and Security
Committee pursuant to Schedule 3, sub-paragraph 3(1)(b)(i) of the ISA;
and, the same information as regards sub-paragraph 3(1)(b)(ii) of the ISA.

17)	Number of violations of any of the Codes of Practice promulgated
under RIPA, broken down by year and section of the code violated.

18)	The British-United States Communications Intelligence Agreement
(now known as the UKUSA Agreement, also referred to as the Five Eyes
Agreement) and subsequent instruments or other documents constituting
agreements regarding the exchange of communications intelligence between the
UK government and the United States, New Zealand, Australia and
Canada.

4

19)	Any other intelligence sharing agreements between the UK government
and any other government, aside from the agreements described in request
number 18.

20)	Documents describing the process and requirements a foreign
intelligence or security agency must fulfill in order to receive access to
information classified by GCHQ.

21) The number of foreign intelligence or security agenâes who currently
have access to information classified by GCHQ.

22)	The number of employees in foreign intelligence or security agencies,
who currently have access to information classified by GCHQ, broken down
by agency. "

7.	The Head of Information Rights at GCHQ replied by email on 4
March 2014 at 16:36, noting their decision to refuse the request (“the
GCHQ refusal decision”). That email referred to the request, stating:

“It has been passed to me, as GCHQ's Information Legislation authority,
for a response. The Freedom of Information Act 2000 (”the Act”) does not
apply to GCHQ by virtue of s.84, which provides that GCHQ is not a
government department for the purposes of the Act. This means that
GCHQ is excluded from the list ofpublic authorities listed in Schedule 1
and to which the Act does apply. As such we are not obliged to comply with
the provisions and requirements of the Act and we cannot assist you further.

I regret that we are unable to be of assistance in this matter. "

(iii)	The reason for the GCHQ^ refusal decision

8.	The Freedom of Information Act 2000 (“FOIA”) is the primary
regime in UK law governing the disclosure of information held by
public authorities.

9.	The basis on which GCHQ refused to provide the information to
Privacy International is that it is excluded from the freedom of
information regime established by FOIA.8

8	Section 1(1) FOIA provides for rights of access to information held by

‘public authorities’. Section 3(1) FOIA provides that ‘public authorities’ are those
listed under Schedule 1, from which GCHQ is omitted. Although Schedule 1
provides generally that any ‘government department’ is a public authority, Section 84
clarifies that GCHQ is not a ‘government department’. GCHQ is thus not a ‘public
authority’ subject to the freedom of information regime established under the Act.

5

10.	As such, the Head of Information Rights of GCHQ was correct to
determine that under FOIA, GCHQ was not obliged to comply with
Privacy International’s request for information.

11.	In fact, FOIA precludes any government authority from disclosing
information if it was directly or indirectly supplied by GCHQ, by
providing an absolute exemption to any duties of disclosure in
relation to such information.9

12.	Further, the Intelligence Services Act 1994 purports to prevent
GCHQ from disclosing to Privacy International information that it
has obtained in the course of pursuing its functions. There is a
statutory requirement on the Director of GCHQ to ensure that no
information obtained is disclosed by GCHQ except so far as is
necessary for the proper discharge of its functions or for the purpose
of criminal proceedings.10

(iv)	The aims of Privacy International in requesting the information
from GCHQ^

13.	Privacy International was pursuing both general and specific
objectives in seeking a broad range of information from GCHQ. Had
the information requested been provided to Privacy International, it
could have enabled the exercise its established watchdog function in
relation to a number of facets of the operation of GCHQ, not least
by enabling it to:

13.1.	review the lawfulness of GCHQ activities and legal advice,
including in relation to mass surveillance;

13.2.	assess the basis on which GCHQ are instructed as to the
ethics of their operations;

13.3.	understand the interaction and compliance of GCHQ with
oversight mechanisms;

See, Sections 2(2)(a), 2(3)(b), 23(1), 23(2)(c).

See, Section 4(2)(a) Intelligence Services Act 1994. The functions of GCHQ
are set out at Section 3(1) and (2) of that Act and are referred to at Footnote 1 above.

10

6

13.4.	inform public debate about the information requested;

13.5.	inform its expert submissions on privacy and surveillance
issues when engaging with parliamentary and government
committees, other international bodies and in litigation;

14.	A specific objective of Privacy International was to obtain access to
the instruments or other documents constituting agreements
regarding the exchange of communications intelligence between the
UK government and the United States, New Zealand, Australia and
Canada, which together form the UKUSA Agreement (known as the
Five Eyes Agreement).

15.	The Five Eyes alliance is the largest and most highly integrated
communications intelligence partnership in the world. Established in
the aftermath of the Second World War, the alliance provides for
extensive acquisition, transfer and analysis of signals intelligence
(“SIGINT”) between the intelligence services of the Five Eyes
member states. The original agreement, declassified by the UK and
US governments in 2010, establishes the conditions for collaboration
between the agencies and contemplated that all intercepted
communications material would be shared amongst Five Eyes states
by default. The modern alliance is grounded in and sustained by an
unknown number of bilateral and multilateral instruments,
agreements, memoranda of understanding and contracts which
stipulate in detail the objectives, modes, means, and confines of
signals intelligence gathering by the five countries, which documents
and instruments are collectively referred to as the Five Eyes
Agreement.

16.	Information provided by NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden
assisted in developing understanding of the current capabilities, scope
and reach of the Five Eyes alliance, and confirmed that the alliance is
more highly advanced and integrated than ever. For example,
Snowden leaked a February 2012 strategy document published by the
US National Security Agency and released to its Five Eyes partners,

7

which noted “we have adapted in innovative and creative ways that
have led some to describe the current day as ‘the golden age of
SIGINT.’ ”n Privacy International takes the position that the Five
Eyes Agreement seriously implicates the rights and interests of
individuals and it should be taken to assume the status of a legally-
binding instrument, and reside in the public domain.

17.	In November 2013 Privacy International launched its Eyes Wide
Open campaign, advocating for greater transparency and scrutiny of
the Five Eyes alliance. As one part of that campaign, it published an
extensive report drawing together the disparate information in the
public domain pertaining to the Five Eyes Agreement.11 12

18.	In seeking to obtain the information requested, Privacy International,
therefore, sought generally to bring greater accountability and
transparency to the surveillance practices of GCHQ. In seeking to
obtain information about the Five Eyes Agreement, Privacy
International sought to bring greater accountability and transparency
to a critically important international alliance that wields significant
power, and which has been insulated from public and legal scrutiny
for most of its history. None of the information sought would have
damaged any genuine or legitimate national security interest.

(v)	Summary of the Facts

19.	On 4 March 2014, Privacy International requested information from
GCHQ in a legitimate effort to gather information of public interest
with the intention of, inter alia, imparting that information to the
public and contributing to public debate.

20.	On 4 March 2014, GCHQ refused to provide the requested
information as it was not required to do so. It is excluded from the
regime of the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA). A FOIA
request to any other public authority supplied with the requested

11	See, Eyes Wide Open, Privacy International, Version 1.0 - 26 November 2013, at
p.L

12	Eyes Wide Open, Privacy International, Version 1.0 - 26 November 2013.

8

information by GCHQ also could not have led to its disclosure. The
public authority would have been absolutely prevented by the terms
of FOIA from disclosing it to Privacy International, irrespective of
the content of the requested information.

21.	The refusal of Privacy International’s request for information was as
a result of a legislative scheme that made no provision for the
disclosure of such information. There was with no consideration by
GCHQ as to whether the refusal was necessary in a democratic
society.

STATEMENT OF ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF THE
CONVENTION AND RELEVANT ARGUMENTS [Box F]

22.	For the reasons set out below, the right of Privacy International to
freedom of expression guaranteed under Article 10 of the European
Convention of Human Rights (“the Convention”) has been violated
and there is no effective remedy for that violation, in violation of
their rights under of Article 13 of the Convention.

(i) Interference with the right of access to information under Article
10

23.	Article 10(1) of the Convention provides that the right to freedom of
expression includes the freedom to receive information. It is a
qualified right, subject to formalities, conditions and restrictions as
set out in Article 10(2).

24.	As set out below, the approach of the ECtHR in applications alleging
breach of Article 10 in relation to the freedom to receive information
held by a government body has evolved since Leander v Sweden13 and
Guerra v Italy. 14 The current leading decision, Târsasâg a
Syabadsâgjogokért v Hungary,15 reflecting a careful but necessary
extension of the Leander approach.16 The Applicants submit that the

13

14

15

16

Application No. 9248/81, (1987) 9 E.H.H.R 434
Application No. 14967/89, (1998) 26 E.H.R.R. 357
Application No. 37374/05, (2009) 53 E.H.R.R. 130

See, dissenting opinion of Lord Wilson JSC in Kennedy v Charity Commission

9

jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights (“ECtHR”),
as set out below, now correctly identifies that the right to receive
information under Article 10(1) includes the right to require an
unwilling public authority in some circumstances to disclose
information.

25.	In Leander, as applied Gaskin v United Kingdom,77 Guerra and
Roche v United Kingdom,75 the ECtHR held:

"The right to freedom to receive information basically prohibits a
Government from restricting a person from receiving information that others
wish or may be willing to impart to him. Article 10 does not, in
circumstances such as those of the present case, confer on the individual a
right of access to a register containing information on his personal position,
nor does it embody an obligation on the Government to impart such
information to the individual. ”* 17 18 19

26.	In Guerra, the ECtHR added that the freedom to receive information
did not impose on the State, in the circumstances of the case, positive
obligations to collect and disseminate information of its own motion.20
That conclusion was repeated in Roche, an application by a former
serviceman for records relating to his exposure to chemicals said to
have damaged his health.21

27.	The approach in Leander was recently endorsed obiter by a majority of
the United Kingdom Supreme Court in Kennedy v Charity Commission.22

28.	The Applicant adopts the analysis of Lord Wilson JSC in Kennedy
where, in his dissenting judgment, he reasoned that the Supreme
Court should “confidently conclude” that a right to require an
unwilling public authority to disclose information can arise under
article 10.”23 Indeed, the evolving recognition of the right of access to
information has been gradual, but since Tarsasag the ECtHR has

[2014] UKSC 20, [2014] 2 WLR at [188].

17	Application No. 10454/83, (1990) 12 E.H.R.R. 36

18	Application	No. 32555/96, (2006) 42 E.H.R.R. 30, at [172].

19	At	[74].

20	At	[53].

21	At	[172]	- [173].

22	[2014] UKSC [2014] 2 WLR.

23	At [189].

10

consistently moved towards recognition of that right: In Társaság the
ECtHR noted the position in Leander but reasoned that “the Court
has recently advanced towards a broader interpretation of the
‘freedom to receive information’ and thereby towards the recognition
of a right of access to information.”24 It considered that obstacles
created in order to hinder access to information of public interest
may hinder those working as ‘public watchdogs’ from pursuing such
matters. Any barrier to the exercise of those functions called for ‘the
most anxious scrutiny’. In the circumstances of that case, where there
was an ‘information monopoly’ preventing access to data was
otherwise readily available. The Court found that the State had an
obligation not to impede the flow of information sought by the
applicant.25 In Kenedi v Hungary26 the applicant historian wished to
publish a study concerning the functioning of the Hungarian State
Security Service and requested that the Ministry of the Interior
provide him access to documents deposited with it. He complained
that the Ministry’s protracted reluctance to grant him unrestricted
access to those documents prevented him from publishing an
objective study on the functioning of the Hungarian State Security
Service. The ECtHR emphasised that “access to original
documentary sources for legitimate historical research was an
essential element of the exercise of the applicant’s right to freedom of
expression”, citing Társaság. The ECtHR found that Article 10 was
engaged (a position accepted by Hungary) and, in the circumstances,
that it had been violated. In Gillberg v Sweden27 the Grand Chamber
referred to the prevention of access to certain documents (such
access had been granted by the Administrative Court of Appeal) as
impinging the right under Article 10 to receive information.28 In
Shapovalov v Ukraine29 the ECtHR relied on paragraph 38 of Társaság,

24

25

26

27

28
29

At [35].

At [38], citing Goodwin v United Kingdom (1996) 22 E.H.R.R. 123 at [39].
(2009) 27 BHRC 335

Application No. 41723/06, (2012) 34 BHRC 247
At [92] to [93].

Application No 45835/05 (2012) 34 BHRC 247.

11

in which the Court referred to the adverse impacts on ‘public
watchdogs’ where obstacles were created to hinder access to
information of public interest.30 In Youth Initiative for Human Rights v
Serbia31 the ECtHR cited a number of relevant international
documents regarding the right to access information held by public
bodies.32 It found a breach of Article 10 arising from the refusal of
the intelligence agency of Serbia to provide the applicant NGO with
certain information about electronic surveillance, notwithstanding a
binding decision of the Information Commissioner in its favour.
Citing Tdrsasdg and Kenedi, the ECtHR found that: “as the applicant
was obviously involved in the legitimate gathering of information of
public interest with the intention of imparting that information to the
public and thereby contributing to the public debate, there has been
an interference with its right to freedom of expression”.33In
Osterreichische Vereinigung %ur Erhaltung, Starkung und Schaffung v Austria34
the applicant association complained that its right to receive
information had been violated as it was refused access to decisions of
a property transactions Commission. The Commission was an
authority that approved or refused transfers of land under an Act that
aimed to preserve land for agricultural and forestry use and the
proliferation of second homes. Those aims, the ECtHR found, were
subjects of general interest. The aim of the applicant association was
to research the impact of transfers of ownership of agricultural
property and forest land on society.35 Citing Tdrsasdg and Kenedi, the
court found: “The applicant association was therefore involved in the
legitimate gathering of information of public interest. Its aim was to
carry out research and to submit comments on draft laws, thereby
contributing to public debate. Consequently, there has been an
interference with the applicant association’s right to receive and to

30

31

32

33

34

35

At [68].

Application No 48135/06 (unreported) given 25 June 2013.

At [13] to [15].

At [24].

Application No 39534/07 (unreported) given 28 November 2013.
At [35].

12

impart information as enshrined in Article 10 § 1 of the Convention”.36
In Rosiianu v Romania37 (decided by the ECtHR several months after
the decision of the United Kingdom Supreme Court in Kennedy) the
applicant journalist requested information relating to the use of funds
by city authorities. The ECtHR noted that the application concerned
access by the applicant to information of a public nature that was
necessary in the exercise of his profession, such access being an
essential element in the exercise of the applicant’s freedom of
expression. The court noted that the applicant sought information of
general importance. Further, the applicant intended to communicate
that information to the public and thus contribute to the public
debate on good public governance. The Court found that it was clear
that he was deprived of his right to impart information. Citing
Târsasâg Kenedi and Youth Initiative for Human Rights, the Court found
that there had been an interference with the rights enshrined in
Article 10(1). The aims of Privacy International in gathering the
information are set out above at [Error! Reference source not
found.]. It is submitted that Privacy International, as a pre-eminent
watchdog engaging with issues of significant public interest regarding
privacy and surveillance, has a qualified right under Article 10 to
access information held by public authorities, especially when
engaged, as it was, in gathering that information to contribute to the
public debate on such issues. Privacy International was denied all
access to such information by reason of the refusal of GCHQ to
provide it. In any event, they are prevented from accessing the
information, as set out above at [8] to [12].

29.	In the circumstances, there was an interference with the rights of
Privacy International to access the requested information under
Article 10(1) of the Convention.

36

37

At [36].

Application No 27329/06, unreported, judgment in French only.

13

(ii) Whether the interference was justified

30.	The interference with the Applicant’s rights under Article 10(1) will
infringe the Convention if it does not meet the requirements of
paragraph 2 of Article 10, which provides:

“2. The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and
responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or
penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society,
in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for
the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the
disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary. ”

31.	The Applicant submits that the interference with its rights was not
necessary in a democratic society.

32.	The infringement of the right of the Applicant to access the
requested information prevented it from engaging with the public
and authorities about information of substantial public interest.
Naturally, the importance of the public interest in the information
requested varies with each request. Similarly, if disclosure of the
information requested posed a risk to national security, public safety
or engaged other restrictions under Article 10(2), that risk also varies
with each request.

33.	The FOIA scheme precluded any consideration of the balance
between the Applicant’s freedom to receive the information
requested and any competing interest identified by Article 10(2). The
Applicants note that ECtHR jurisprudence confirms that interference
with the rights under Article 10 can only be justified by “imperative
necessities” and that any exceptions to freedom of expression must
be interpreted narrowly38; the Court has taken the position that, even
where an interference with freedom of expression is based on
considerations of national security and public safety and is part of a
State's fight against terrorism, the interference can be regarded as

38

See: Vereinigung Demokratischer Soldaten
Application No. 15153/89 (1995) 20 E.H.R.R. 56.

Osterreichs and Gubi v Austria,

14

necessary only if it is proportionate to the aims pursued.39 As set out
below, the Applicant submits that, in the circumstance, there was an
unnecessary interference with its rights. First, without consideration
by GCHQ of the necessity and proportionality of secrecy in relation
to each of their requests, the restriction on the Applicant’s rights to
access the information was arbitrary and there was no safeguard
against it being disproportionate.

34.	Second, the absolute restriction on their access to information, held
only by GCHQ, was without reference to the value of the Applicant’s
right to freedom of expression, and amounts to a fundamental and
insurmountable obstacle to the exercise of that freedom. As the
ECtHR noted in Târsasâg , such barriers should be subject to ‘the
most anxious scrutiny’.40 Third, further, the Applicant notes that the
denial of access to the requested information restricted its political
expression. The Court has long held that “political expression”,
including expression on matters of public interest and concern,
requires a high level of protection under Article 10.41 The Applicant
submits that this should have weighed heavily in a decision as to
whether or not to restrict its freedom to access the information.
GCHQ was prevented by the FOIA scheme from giving any weight
to this factor.

35.	Fourth, the Applicant notes that the issues arising from the requested
information, on which it wishes to inform the public and engage with
national and international institutions, are issues of exceptional public
concern given the development of mass surveillance using modern
technologies and the recent public revelation of the same by Edward
Snowden and media organisations in a number of Council of Europe
states. The ECtHR has recognised the role of civil society
organisations as a public watchdog akin to the press in safeguarding

39

Ceylan v Turkey, Application No 23556/94, 30 E.H.R.R. 73 at [41]

40	See above at [33]

41	See: Steel and Morris v UK Application No.68416/01 (2005) 41 E.H.R.R. 22,
at [88] to [89], citing, inter alia, Thorgeir Thorgeirson v Iceland ( A/239): (1992) 14
E.H.R.R. 843

15

democracies.42 43 This was recently articulated in relation to Privacy
International by Mr Justice Green in R (on the application of Privacy
International) —and— The Commissioner for HM Revenue and Custom43 as
follows: “Pressure groups share many similarities with the press. They
can act as guardians of the public conscience. As with the press their
very existence and the pressure they bring to bear on particular issues
and upon those who are responsible for governance of those issues,
is one of the significant checks and balances in a democratic society.
They have, therefore, a significant role to play.”44

36.	In this context, the Applicants submit that their ‘watchdog’ function
should also have been afforded great weight in any decision relating
to the disclosure of the requested information; in fact, it was given no
weight.

37.	Finally, the Applicant notes that in a modern democracy there are
many ways open to government to secure to Privacy International
and other public watchdogs their qualified right to access to
information, including sensitive information. An absolute restriction
on access to all information held by GCHQ means that in every
instance, regardless of the public interest in favour of disclosure or
the absence of any genuine national security risk, disclosure will never
be provided. It is submitted that this has caused in this case a
disproportionate restriction on the right of the Applicant to freedom
of access to information.

(iii)	Article 13

38.	The Applicant submits that there is no effective domestic remedy
capable of dealing with the substance of the alleged violation of its

42	See, e.g., Vides A.i%ard%ibas Klubs v Latvia Application No. 57829/00.

43	[2014] EWHC 1475 (Admin)

44	At [77]. The ECtHR has also stated that it considers that in a democratic
society “even small and informal campaign groups [...] must be able to carry on their
activities effectively and that there exists a strong public interest in enabling such
groups and individuals outside the mainstream to contribute to the public debate by
disseminating information and ideas on matters of general public interest [...]”: Steel
and Morris v UK at [88] to [89].

16

rights, nor is appropriate relief available.45 As GCHQ is excluded
from the FOIA scheme, there was no appeal or other remedy against
the refusal decision available to the Claimant.

45	See, e.g. Österreichische Vereinigung zur Erhaltung, Stärkung und Schaffung v
Austria, at [54]:	“As the Court has held on many occasions, Article 13 of the

Convention guarantees the availability at national level of a remedy to enforce the
substance of the Convention rights and freedoms in whatever form they may happen
to be secured in the domestic legal order. The effect of Article 13 is thus to require
provision of a domestic remedy to deal with the substance of an “arguable
complaint” under the Convention and to grant appropriate relief. The scope of the
Contracting States’ obligations under Article 13 varies depending on the nature of
the applicant’s complaint; however, the remedy required by Article 13 must be
“effective” in practice as well as in law...” . The Applicant also notes, to the
extent that any legislation may be incompatible with Convention rights, that Grand
Chamber in Burden and Burden v UK (2008) 47 EHRR 38 did not, at that time,
consider a declaration of incompatibility to be an effective remedy for the purposes
of Article 13.

17