Our ref: MPS/FT/002295/000
Your ref:

Email:	m.scott@bhattmurphy.co.uk

Bhatt Murphy Solicitors

Investigatory Powers Tribunal
P.O.Box 33220
London
SW1H 9ZQ

27 Hoxton Square
London N1 6NN

Phone 020 7729 1115
Fax 020 7729 1117

www.bhattmurphy.co.uk
DX 36626 Finsbury

Also by email

13 May 2014
Dear Sir

Privacy International v Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs and Government Communications
New Claim

We enclose:

1.	FormH;

2.	Form T2;

3.	Grounds in support.

We await hearing from you.

Yours faithfully,

Bhatt Murphy

Partners
Hamish Arnott
Raju Bhatt
Simon Creighton
Carolynn Gallwey
Tony Murphy
Nogah Ofer
Mark Scott

Solicitors
Jasmine Chadha
Shamik Dutta
Janet Farrell
Alice Hardy
Sophie Naftalin
Michael Oswald
Jed Pennington
Megan Phillips
Clare Richardson
Jane Ryan

Authorised and regulated
by the Solicitors Regulation
Authority No. 00287785

The Investigatory Powers Tribunal
Human Rights Claim Form

Form T1

Please use this form if your claim is that your human rights have been infringed within the terms of the Human
Rights Act 1998

You will need to complete this form if your claim is against any of the Intelligence Services or one or more of the
Public Authorities listed in the accompanying T1 information leaflet or the IPT website (www.ipt-uk.com). Your
claim must also include circumstances which involved (or which currently involve) the conduct described in the
information leaflet.

If you wish to make a complaint, please complete form T2.

Please complete the form legibly, in black or dark ink and in block capitals. When you have completed the form
please sign and date it together with any separate sheets which you wish to submit alongside the main form

You must also supply, either in or alongside the T1 form, a summary of the information, and any other documentary
evidence where appropriate, on which your claim is based.

Your Details

PRIVACY INTERNATIONA-	(A registered charity)

Your surname.......................Your surname at birth (if different)..............

Your surname at the date(s) when the events complained of occurred (if different)

Your forename(s).......................................................................

Any other names by which you were commonly known when the events complained of occurred

Title (Mr, Mrs, Miss etc.).......................Date of Birth.................................

62 Britton Street, London EC1M 5UY

Your current address including your postcode...................................................

If this form is being submitted by your solicitor or adviser, please complete this section.

SCOTT

Surname of solicitor or adviser................................................

M	Mr

Initials........................................Title..........................

Bhatt Murphy

Name of firm (if applicable)...................................................

27 Hoxton Square, London N1 6NN

Address including postcode.....................................................

Please answer the following questions to the best of your knowledge and belief. If there is insufficient space on
this form please use an additional sheet of paper if you need to, making it clear to which questions the additional
information relates.

1.	WHICH ORGANISATION OR ORGANISATIONS DO YOU BELIEVE HAS INFRINGED YOUR HUMAN
RIGHTS?

(See the information leaflet or IPT website)

(JUHU ana tne otner security ana intelligence services

2.	WHICH OF YOUR HUMAN RIGHTS DO YOU BELIEVE HAS BEEN INFRINGED?
(See the information leaflet or IPT website)

Articles 8 and 10 ECHR

3.	AT WHICH PLACE OR PLACES WERE YOUR HUMAN RIGHTS INFRINGED?

See attached

4.	WHAT HAPPENED?

(Please give details of what happened and, if it is not obvious, why you believe that what happened amounted to an
infringement of your human rights. See the information leaflet or IPT website)

See attached

□□

5. ON WHAT DATE DID THE INFRINGEMENT HAPPEN AT EACH PLACE?

(See the information leaflet)

Ungoing

6.	IS THERE EVIDENCE, OTHER THAN YOUR OWN, IN SUPPORT OF YOUR CLAIM? IF SO, WHO COULD
PROVIDE THAT EVIDENCE? WHAT IS THAT EVIDENCE LIKELY TO BE?

bee attacned

7.	IF THE EVENTS WHICH YOU ARE COMPLAINING ABOUT HAPPENED MORE THAN ONE YEAR AGO,
PLEASE PROVIDE A FULL EXPLANATION FOR THE DELAY IN SUBMITTING YOUR CLAIM?

(See the information leaflet)

Not applicable

8.	IF THE TRIBUNAL UPHOLDS YOUR CLAIM WHAT REMEDIES DO YOU SEEK?

(See the information leaflet)

A declaration that the matters set out in the complaint are well founded and GCHu's conduct
has been unlawful, an injunction restraining any similar future conduct, an order requiring the
destruction of any information unlawfully obtained and a public judgment

Do you wish correspondence from the Tribunal to be sent to you or to your solicitor or adviser instead of to you?
Please tick one box only

Please send correspondence to me

Please send correspondence to my solicitor/adviser instead of me

Confidentiality

Your claim will be handled in confidence. To carry out its functions, the Tribunal has power to call for any official
documents or information it may need. The Tribunal cannot disclose details of your claim without your permission
(except for the information described in Tribunal Rule 7(2)(a) and (b) quoted in the information leaflet). If it does
not have your permission to disclose details of your claim it may not be possible for the Tribunal to investigate your
claim properly. (See the information leaflet)

Please tick here if you are prepared to give that permission

Declaration

I have answered all the questions on the application form to the best of my knowledge and belief.

Signature ..

Date.Wß/tt..I...

The Investigatory Powers Tribuna

w;,:	; ■■	v

Complaint Form

Form T2

Please complete this form if your complaint is against any of the Intelligence Services or one or more of the Public
Authorities listed at the end of the 12 information leaflet, and if it is not a Human Rights claim. If you wish to make
a claim under the Human Rights Act 1998, please complete Form T1.

Please complete the form legibly, in black or dark ink and in block capitals. When you have completed the form
please sign and date it together with any separate sheets which you wish to submit along with the form itself.

You must also supply, either in or alongside the 12 form, a summary of the information, and other documentary
evidence where appropriate, on which your complaint is based.

Your Details

PRIVACY INTERNATIONAL (A registered charity)

Your surname.....................................................

Your surname at birth (if different).............................

Your surname at the date(s) when the events complained of occurred (if different)

Your forename(s)......................................................................

Any other names by which you were commonly known when the events complained of occurred

Title (Mr, Mrs, Miss etc.)........................Date of Birth................................

62 Britton Street, London EC1M 5UY

Your current address including your postcode...................................................

If this form is being submitted by your solicitor or adviser, please complete this section.

SCOTT

Surname of solicitor or adviser...............................................

M	Mr

Initials........................................Title.........................

Bhatt Murphy

Name of firm (if applicable)..................................................

27 Hoxton Square, London N1 6NN

Address including postcode.....................................................

Please answer the following questions to the best, of your knowledge and belief. If there is insufficient space on
this form please use an additional sheet of paper if you need to, making it clear to which questions the additional
information relates.

1.	TO WHICH ORGANiSATION(S) DOES YOUR COMPLAINT RELATE AND WHY? (Please see the list in the
information leaflet or refer to our website. This includes persons acting ori behalf of an organisation.)

GCHQ, and the other security and intelligence services

2.	WHAT IS THE NATURE OF THE
CONDUCT COMPLAINED OF?
(The Tribunal can only consider your
complaint if it comes under one or more
of the following headings. Please tick
the box or boxes which apply to your
complaint.)

Conduct which you believe to have
been carried out in relation to you,
by or on behalf of, any of the UK
Intelligence Services. That conduct
may relate to you, your property or your
communications. You can complain of
that conduct whether or not it involves
the use of an investigatory power under
the Regulation of Investigatory Powers

Act 2000.

Your communications by post or
your telecommunications have been
intercepted e.g. telephone tapping or
interference with your mail.

ijS| There has been entry onto or
Œ1 interference with your property or with
your wireless telegraphy.

□ Surveillance by a public authority has
taken place which has resulted, or is
likely to result, in private information
about you being obtained.

□ Surveillance concerning you has been
carried out, or is being carried out, by a
public authority in relation to anything
taking place on any residential premises
or in any private vehicle.

□ Covert human intelligence has been
used in relation to you, e.g. a public
authority has used, or is using, a
personal or other relationship for the
purpose of getting information about
you.

□ You have been given a notice under
section 49 relating to investigation of
electronic data protected by encryption.

I|j§1 Data has been obtained relating to a
‘-• communications system.

The carrying out of surveillance by a
foreign police or customs officer (within
the meaning of section 76A)

3. WHAT IS YOUR COMPLAINT?

(Please give details of the conduct
you are complaining about, including
telephone numbers and e-mail accounts,
and say why you think your complaint falls
within the category or categories which
you have ticked.)

4. AT WHICH PLACE OR PLACES
DID THE CONDUCT OF WHICH
YOU COMPLAIN HAPPEN?
(Please give the full address of
any property and details of any
vehicles to which the complaint
relates.)

See attached		Ongoing
see attacnea		Ungoing
		
see attached		ungoing
		
		
		
		
see attacnea		ungoing
		

5. ON WHAT DATES(S) DID THE CONDUCT HAPPEN AT EACH PLACE? (Please see the information leaflet)

ungoing

8.	IS THERE EVIDENCE OTHER THAN YOUR OWN IN SUPPORT OF YOUR COMPLAINT? If so, who could
provide that evidence? What is that evidence likely to be?

See attached

7. IF THE EVENTS WHICH YOU ARE COMPLAINING ABOUT HAPPENED MORE THAN ONE YEAR AGO
PLEASE PROVIDE A FULL EXPLANATION FOR THE DELAY IN SUBMITTING YOUR COMPLAINT? (See the
information leaflet)

not applicable------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 8

8. IF THE TRIBUNAL UPHOLDS YOUR COMPLAINT WHAT REMEDIES DO YOU SEEK?
(See the information leaflet)

A declaration tnat tne matters set out ¡n tne complaint are well founded and uumu's conduct nas oeen unlawful,
an injunction restraining any similar future conduct, an order requiring the destruction of any information unlawfully
obtained and a public judgment

Do you wish correspondence from the Tribunal to be sent to you or to your solicitor or adviser instead of to you?
Please tick one box only

Please send correspondence to me

Please send correspondence to my solicitor/adviser instead of me

Confidentiality

Your claim will be handled in confidence. To carry out its functions, the Tribunal has power to call for any official
documents or information it may need. The Tribunal cannot disclose details of your claim without your permission
(except for the information described in Tribunal Rule 8(2)(a) and (b) quoted in the information leaflet). If it does not
have your permission to disclose details of your complaint it may not be possible for the Tribunal to investigate your
complaint properly. (See the information leaflet)

Please tick here if you are prepared to give that permission

Declaration

I have answered all the questions on the application form to the best of my knowledge and belief.

Signature:

Date:...................^.....Zj&.ftrjr..

IN THE INVESTIGATORY POWERS TRIBUNAL

BETWEEN:

PRIVACY INTERNATIONAL

Claimant

-and-

(1) SECRETARY OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH AFFAIRS

(2)	GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION HEADQUARTERS

Defendants

STATEMENT OF GROUNDS

Introduction

1.	Privacy International is a leading UK charity working on the right to privacy at an
international level. It focuses, in particular, on challenging unlawful acts of
surveillance.

2.	The Secretary of State for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office is the minister
responsible for oversight of the Government Communication Headquarters
("GCHQ"), the UK's signals intelligence agency.

3.	These proceedings concern the infection by GCHQ of individuals' computers and
mobile devices on a widespread scale to gain access either to the functions of those
devices - for instance activating a camera or microphone without the user's consent -
or to obtain stored data. Recently-disclosed documents suggest GCHQ has
developed technology to infect individual devices, and in conjunction with the
United States National Security Agency ("NSA"), has the capability to deploy that
technology to potentially millions of computers by using malicious software
("malware"). GCHQ has also developed malware, known as "WARRIOR PRIDE",
specifically for infecting mobile phones.

4.	The use of such techniques is potentially far more intrusive than any other current
surveillance technique, including die interception of communications. At a basic
level, the profile information supplied by a user in registering a device for various
purposes may include details of his location, age, gender, marital status, income,

1

ethnicity, sexual orientation, education, and family. More fundamentally, access to
stored content (such as documents, photos, videos, web history, or address books),
not to mention the logging of keystrokes or the covert and unauthorised
photography or recording of the user and those around him, will produce further
such information, as will the ability to track the precise location of a user of a mobile
device. If the interception of communications is the modern equivalent of wire-
tapping, then the activity at issue in this complaint is the modern equivalent of
entering someone's house, searching through his filing cabinets, diaries and
correspondence, and planting devices to permit constant surveillance in future, and,
if mobile devices are involved, obtaining historical information including every
location he visited in the past year. The only differences are the ease and speed with
which it can be done, the ease of concealing that it has been or is being done, and the
fact that, if a mobile device has been infected, the ongoing surveillance will capture
the affected individuals wherever they are.

5.	Moreover, the result of tire installation of tire malware may be to leave tire devices
more vulnerable to attack by third parties (such as credit card fraudsters), thereby
risking the user's personal data more broadly. It is the modern equivalent of
breaking in to a residence, and leaving the locks broken or damaged afterwards.

6.	That conduct therefore engages Articles 8 and 10 of the European Convention on
Human Rights ("ECHR"), which require (i) that the interference be "in accordance
with the law" or "prescribed by law", or in other words that there be a clear and
ascertainable legal regime in place which contains sufficient safeguards against abuse
of power and arbitrary use, and (ii) that the interference be necessary in a democratic
society and a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.

7.	GCHQ has not identified any legal basis for the alleged conduct, which if performed
by a private individual would involve the commission of criminal offences. It is
assumed at this stage that the justification under domestic law is a warrant issued
under s.5 Intelligence Services Act 1994 ("ISA 1994"), which permits "entry on or
interference with property or with wireless telegraphy" in certain circumstances. 8

8.	Even if there is such a justification, it is nevertheless clear that (i) the interference
with Convention rights is not "in accordance with the law" or "prescribed by law", since
there is no public legal regime in place that is capable of meeting the requirements of

2

Articles 8 and 10, and (ii) it is not proportionate, both because of the extremely
serious nature of the intrusion, and because the relevant activity (at least the
infection of the devices, if not the use of the malware once installed) appears to be
indiscriminate in nature.

9.	These grounds accompany the forms T1 and T2 filed by Privacy International. They
set out, in summary terms, the grounds relied upon. Privacy International will make
detailed submissions and serve evidence in due course, once the Defendants have
clarified the nature of their activities and their justification for them.

10.	Privacy International also seeks a public hearing of its complaint. The fact that
documents evidencing the Defendants' activities have been released into and
extensively reported on and analysed in the public domain means that there is no
longer any good reason to uphold the Defendants' ordinary policy of 'neither
confirm nor deny' in this case: see R (Bancoult) v SSFCA [2013] EWHC 1502 (Admin)
at [28].

The Defendants' Conduct

11.	From June 2013 onwards, a number of public disclosures have been made (beginning
with publication in The Guardian and The Washington Post of documents leaked by a
former NSA contractor, Edward Snowden) about programmes of surveillance
operated by the NSA with the close involvement of other authorities, including the
UK authorities and specifically GCHQ.

12.	Most of tire revelations concern the scope of the NSA and GCHQ's monitoring of
communications, including the "Prism” programme (the monitoring of information
stored by telecommunications companies or internet service providers) and
"upstream collection" (the direct interception of communications during transmission).
Those activities are the subject of existing complaints before the IPT.

13.	This complaint relates to more recent revelations regarding GCHQ's infection and
intrusion into individual devices.

14.	For instance, on 12 March 2014, The Intercept - an online publication established in
February 2014 with the aim, among others, of reporting on and analysing documents
released by Edward Snowden - published an article entitled "How the NSA Plans to

3

Infect 'Millions' of Computers with Malware."1 Published along with that article were
numerous documents and excerpts of documents indicating that the NSA "is
dramatically expanding its ability to covertly hack into computers on a mass scale by using
automated systems that reduce the level of human oversight in the process. The classified files
- provided previously by NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden - contain new details about
groundbreaking surveillance technology the agency has developed to infect potentially
millions of computers worldwide with malware 'implants.' " GCHQ has collaborated with
the NSA in these activities.

15.	By way of summary of what is now publicly known:

a.	GCHQ has worked closely with the NSA to intrude on individual computers
and mobile devices. This is evidenced in The Intercept article, which both
describes GCHQ's intrusion efforts, and includes a number of excerpts of
documents marked with security designations showing they were shared
with all die members of the Five Eyes alliance, including the NSA and
GCHQ. The NSA and GCHQ's close working relationship is now well
documented, including diat many of their agents are issued access cards that
allow them to enter die facilities of either agency.

b.	One of the documents published by The Intercept describes the technique of
implanting malware onto a user's computer as "Active SIGINT", and says:
"Active SIGINT offers a more aggressive approach to SIGINT. We retrieve data
through intervention in our targets' computers or network devices. Extract data from
machine."1 2

c.	That technique involves covert installation of software onto the user's
computer through one of a number of means, such as tricking the user into
clicking a malicious link, or (more recently) injecting malicious code into the
network transmission tiiat individuals receive when browsing websites like
Facebook or Linkedln so as to transfer die malware as part of the computer's
ordinary downloading of data.

1	https://firstlook.org/theintercept/ article/2014/ 03/12/nsa-plans-infect-millions-computers-
malware/

2	https://prod01-cdn02.cdn.firstlook.org/wp-uploads/sites/1/2014/03/intelligent-command-and-
control.jpg

4

d.	The Intercept also reports: "GCHQ, the British intelligence agency, appears to have
played an integral role in helping to develop the implants tactic."3 (underlining
indicates emphasis added). Some of these intrusion tools developed are as
follows: "An implant plug-in named CAPTIVATED AUDIENCE, for example, is
used to take over a targeted computer's microphone and record conversations taking
place near the device. Another, GUMFISH, can covertly take over a computer's
webcam and snap photographs. FOGGYBOTTOM records logs of Internet browsing
histories and collects login details and passwords used to access websites and email
accounts. GROK is used to log keystrokes. And SAEVAGERABBIT exfiltrates data
from removable flash drives that connect to an infected computer."

e.	In addition to the concept of implanting malware itself, the documents
released by The Intercept describe an automated system named TURBINE
which, in the words of the above undated document, "will allow the current
implant network to scale to large size (millions of implants) by creating a system that
does automated control implants by groups instead of individually."4 Another
undated document reads: "TURBINE [...] will increase the current capability to
deploy and manage hundreds of Computer Network Exploitation (CNE) and
Computer Network Attack (CAN) implants to potentially millions of implants."5 Yet
another, shared with the Five Eyes surveillance alliance, referred to TURBINE
as permitting "Industrial-scale exploitation."6

f.	Images of slides from a leaked presentation prepared by the NSA's
"Turbulence" team in August 2009 describe the "Expert System" which is
designed to manage the implants and "decide" how best to extract data. The
classification on those slides ("TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS,
CAN, GBR, NZE//20291123") indicates that they were shared with the UK
authorities among others, and tire diagram of the Expert System shows that a

3	https://firstIook.org/theintercept/article/2014/03/12/nsa-plans-infect-millions-computers-
malware/

4	https://prod01-cdn02.cdn.firstlook.org/wp-uploads/sites/l/2014/03/intelligent-command-and-
control.jpg

5	https://prod01-cdn03.cdn.firstlook.org/wp-uploads/sites/1/2014/03/turbine-large.jpg

6	https:// firstlook.org/ theintercept/ document/2014/03/12/ industrial-scale-exploitation/

5

station at "MHS" in the UK, i.e. RAF Menwith Hill station, is part of the
network.7

g.	Further documents show that RAF Menwith Hill and GCHQ have been
integral to the development and use of implanting techniques.

i.	A document shared with the Five Eyes alliance refers to MHS as
having tested tire use of a technique (called "Quantum'') hr relation to
Yahoo and Hotmail, websites which host online email accounts on
behalf of private users.8

ii.	Another such document refers to the availability of that technique at
sites including "Menwith Hill Station" and "INCENSOR (DS-300) -
with help from GCHQ".9

iii.	Der Spiegel, reporting on 29 December 2013 on an internal NSA
document disclosed to it, wrote: "A comprehensive internal presentation
titled 'QUANTUM CAPABILITIES', which SPIEGEL has viewed, lists
virtually every popular Internet service provider as a target, including
Facebook, Yahoo, Twitter and Youtube. 'NSA QUANTUM has the greatest
success against Yahoo, Facebook and static IP addresses,' it states. The
presentation also notes that the NSA has been unable to employ this method
to target users of Google services. Apparently, that can only be done by
Britain's GCHQ intelligence service, which has acquired QUANTUM tools
from the NSA "

16.	In addition to tire above, there is clear evidence that GCHQ has developed extensive
means of manipulating mobile devices in particular:

a.	Documents published by The Guardian on 28 January 2014, in particular a set
of slides from a GCHQ presentation delivered on 28 May 2010, revealed that
GCHQ had by May 2010 developed a suite of software known as "WARRIOR
PRIDE" for iPhones and Android devices.

7	https://firstlook.org/ theintercept/document/2014/03/12/turbine-turmoil/

8	https://firstlook.org/theintercept/document/2014/03/12/menwith-hill-station-leverages-
xkeyscore-quantum-yahoo-hotmail/

9	https://firstlook.org/theintercept/document/2014/03/12/nsa-gchqs-quantumtheory-hackiirg-
tactics/

6

b.	The slides referred to the following functionality available in relation to those
devices, with their codenames:

"* Power Management - DREAMY SMURF

*	Hot mic - NOSEY SMURF

*	High precision GEO - TRACKER SMURF

*	Kernel stealth - PORUS

*	Self protection - PARANOID SMURF

*	File retrieval - any content from phone, e.g. SMS, MMS, e-mails, web

histonj, call records, videos, photos, address book, notes, calendar, (if its on

the phone, we can get it)"

c.	In other words, as early as May 2010 those tools allowed at least for (i) the
activation of a microphone and the taking of recordings without the user's
consent ("Hot mic"), (ii) precise identification of the geographical
whereabouts of the user ("High precision GEO"), (iii) avoidance of detection
that the security of the device has been compromised ("Kernel stealth" and
"Self-protection"), and (iv) the retrieval of any content on the phone.

17.	It is not known (not least because there is no clear or accessible legal regime
governing it) how many devices are infected, whether there is any time limit on the
infection, who has the power to activate or use the malware, who has access to the
information it generates, and so on. That is itself a significant cause for concern. But
in any event there are two other concerns as a matter of principle:

a.	First, however widely they are used, the tools allow GCHQ access to a large
amount of highly private data. The information stored on a computer or
mobile device is potentially far more comprehensive than the information
that an individual communicates over a network in a manner capable of
interception, or information that could be obtained from a search of his home
or office. Indeed, computers and mobile devices have replaced and
consolidated our filing cabinets, photo albums, video archives, personal
diaries and journals, address books, correspondence files, fixed-line

7

telephones. Increasingly, they are also replacing our formal identification
documents, our bank and credit cards. These devices may contain not only
details about the user's personal circumstances (for instance his age, gender,
or sexual orientation), but also financial information, unencrypted passwords,
privileged legal information and so on. Unlike in the case of an interception
of communications, even information that die user deems too personal,
private or sensitive to communicate is vulnerable to collection or monitoring
when intrusion tools are utilised. And, as noted, intrusive malware not only
gives access to historical, current and future data stored on these devices, but
also grants the person who planted the malware total control over the device.
This means that any functionality on the device, including its camera,
microphone, or word processing and storage software, may be utilized and
manipulated. Additionally, access to an electronic device enables the whoever
controls the malware to obtain data that is situated not on the device itself,
but in an external network server known as "the cloud". For example, while
only a limited number of emails might be stored directly on an individuals'
smart phone, control of that smart phone enables access to all emails stored in
the cloud.

b.	Second, the means by which collection or monitoring is made possible may
itself leave users vulnerable to further damage, in three ways. First, the
malware that is installed on a device could be used by third parties; for
example, the keyloggers described above might be used to capture a person's
credit card number. Second, the changes necessary to install the malware
without alerting the user or his security software may result in security
vulnerabilities that could be exploited by third parties in other ways. Third, to
the extent that any exploits are built into network infrastructure in order to
enable the installation of the malware, those exploits might themselves be
used by third parties to similar ends.

18.	Further, there have been clear indications that GCHQ itself has reservations about
the legality of such operations.

a.	An undated NSA document referring to a trilateral programme between
"NSA, GCHQ, and FRA'' (the Swedish signals intelligence agency) for the

8

deployment of the Quantum technique says: "Continued GCHQ involvement
may be in jeopardy due to British legal/policy restrictions".10 There is no further
explanation of the concerns.

b.	A document prepared by a representative of GCHQ for an international
telecommunications conference in September 2010 reads, in relation to the
implanting of software to decrypt communications encrypted with a
particular standard (//MIKEY-IBAKE//): "An additional concern in the UK is that
performing an active attack, such as the Man-in-the-Middle attack proposed in the
Lawful Interception solution for M1KEY-ÎBAKE may be illegal. The UK Computer
Misuse Act 1990 provides legislative protection against unauthorised access to and
modification of computer material. The act makes specific provisions for law
enforcement agencies to access computer material under powers of inspection, search
or seizure. However, the act makes no such provision for modification of computer
material. A Man-in-the-Middle attack causes modification to computer data and will
impact the reliability of the data. As a result, it is likely that LEMEs and PLMNs
woidd be unable to perform LI on MIKEY-IBAKE within the current legal
constraints."

Effect on Privacy International

19.	In order to pursue this complaint, Privacy International need not show that it is has
actually been the subject of the alleged interference.

a.	In the context of monitoring of communications, the European Court of
Human Rights has held that "the mere existence of legislation which allows a
system for the secret monitoring of communications entails a threat of surveillance
for all those to whom the legislation may be applied. This threat necessarily strikes at
freedom of communication between users of the telecommunications services and
thereby amounts in itself to an interference with the exercise of the applicants' rights
under art.8, irrespective of any measures actually taken against them": Liberty v
United Kingdom (2009) 48 EHRR 1 at [56].

10	https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/894386-legal-issues-uk-regarding-sweden-and-
quantum.html

9

b.	For the reasons given above, the interference in the present case - the active
collection of data through manipulation of the user's property - is more
serious than the monitoring of communications. Accordingly, the same
principle applies in this case.

c.	Likewise, if "the mere existence of legislation" permitting interference is a
sufficient interference with a fundamental freedom to justify a legal
challenge, then the fact that there is evidence of an interference without any
meaningful legislative control is an even clearer case where a complainant
need not show actual interference with his own affairs, hi those
circumstances, where there is no statutory scheme, Code of Practice or
published policy indicating who can be targeted and in what circumstances,
it is even more difficult for an individual to know whether diey have been
subject to the relevant activity.

d.	The same principle was applied to Article 10 by the Court in Weber v Germany
(2008) 46 EHRR SE5 at [145], where the applicant's status as a journalist
meant that surveillance of communications affected her right to freedom of
expression: she "communicated with persons she wished to interview on subjects
such as drugs and arms trafficking or preparations for war, which were also the
subject of strategic monitoring. Consequently, there was a danger that her
telecommunications for journalistic purposes might be monitored and that her
journalistic sources might be either disclosed or deterred from calling or providing
information by telephone." Again, the test is only whether the complainant is
within the category of persons who may be affected by the interference.

20.	Privacy International is clearly within the category of persons who may be affected
by the interference.

a.	It and its staff routinely use a variety of computers and mobile devices in the
course of their work, including smartphones such as those identified in
GCHQ's May 2010 presentation described above. Given the apparently
indiscriminate nature of the activity in question, that is sufficient on its own
to place diem in the necessary category.

10

b.	Even if the activity is not wholly indiscriminate, it is clearly wide-ranging.
Privacy International, as an organisation campaigning against excessive state
surveillance (and therefore critical of tire activities of GCHQ), and
corresponding with other organisations and campaign groups across the
world with similar goals and objectives, is well within tire potential scope of
such activity.

c.	Moreover, Privacy International has precisely the same concern as the
applicant in Weber in relation to Article 10. It works on capacity building on
issues of privacy in developing countries, sometimes in places with weak
democracies which are of particular interest to US and UK foreign policy, and
where strong privacy safeguards may conflict with the objectives of
intelligence agencies. Groups and individuals in repressive regimes,
individuals in the UK concerned about their own privacy, as well as victims,
whistleblowers mid journalists frequently contact Privacy International. They
may be dissuaded from doing so, or from communicating freely, for fear that
their communications will be monitored.

Legal Framework

Human Rights Act 1998 and European Convention of Human Rights

21.	By s.6 Human Rights Act 1998, it is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way
which is incompatible with one of the rights set out in Schedule 1 to the Act, which
incorporates various rights from the European Convention including Articles 8 and
10.

22.	Article 8 of the Convention provides:

1.	Evenjone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and
his correspondence.

2.	There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this
right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a
democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the
economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,

11

for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and
freedoms of others.

Article 10 provides:

1.	Everyone has the light to freedom of expression. This right shall include
freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas
without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers. This
Article shall not prevent States from requiring the licensing of broadcasting,
television or cinema enterprises.

2.	The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and
responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or
penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society,
in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for
the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the
disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

23.	There are therefore four questions in any analysis of whether those rights have been
breached:

a.	Is the relevant right engaged?

b.	Is the interference "in accordance with the law" (Article 8) or "prescribed by law"
(Article 10)?

c.	Is the interference in pursuit of one of the listed aims?

d.	Is the interference "necessary in a democratic society" in pursuit of that aim - in
other words, is it proportionate to the goal which is sought to be achieved?

24.	Article 8 and Article 10 rights are clearly engaged by the interference.

a. As for Article 8, the collection of data through implanted malware on
computers and mobile devices has the potential, in the modern world, to
reveal almost every ultimate detail of a person's life - from correspondence

12

and connections, to historical and current location, to financial and health
information, to information about family life, sexuality, or political beliefs -
and may allow real-time surveillance through keystroke logging or the co-
option of microphones and video cameras. All of these things are obviously
private information within the meaning of Article 8. By way of example, the
European Court of Human Rights has held in the context of workplace
monitoring that that "emails sent from work" and "information derived from the
monitoring of personal internet usage" are both protected by Article 8: Copland v
United Kingdom (2007) 45 EHRR 37 at [41]. That is a small subset of the
information that can be obtained through GCHQ's activity.

b. As for Article 10, the Court has recognised in Weber (above, [144-145]) that the
fact that "the threat of secret surveillance [...] necessarily strikes at the freedom of
communication of users of telecommunications services" means that it engages
Article 10 if the effect is to discourage communications. The same principle
must apply to the threat of intrusion into computers and devices via the
internet, to the extent that it discourages the free use of the internet, which it
obviously will if left uncontrolled.

25.	Privacy International accepts that, in principle, surveillance may be conducted for
legitimate aims such as national security. The issue is therefore whether the
interference is "in accordance with the law" or "prescribed by law", and whether it is
necessary and proportionate.

26.	The requirement that the interference be "in accordance with the law" or "prescribed by
law" demands more than merely that the interference be lawful as a matter of English
law: it must also be "compatible with the rule of law”: Gillan v United Kingdom (2010) 50
EHRR 45 at [76]. That means it must "afford a measure of legal protection against
arbitrany interferences by public authorities", and indicate "with sufficient clarity" the
scope of any discretion conferred and the maimer of its exercise: Gillan at [77].

27.	Numerous cases have addressed this requirement in the context of secret
surveillance and information gathering.

a. In Malone v United Kingdom (1985) 7 EHRR 14, die Court held that the legal
regime governing interception of communications "must be sufficiently clear in

13

its terms to give citizens an adequate indication as to the circumstances in which and
the conditions on which public authorities are empowered to resort to this secret and
potentially dangerous interference with the right to respect for private life and
correspondence" [67]. It must be clear "what elements of the powers to intercept are
incoiyorated in legal rides and what elements remain within the discretion of the
executive" and the law must indicate "with reasonable clarity the scope and
manner of exercise of the relevant discretion conferred on the public authorities" [79].

b.	In Association for European Integration and Human Rights v Bulgaria (62540/00,
28 June 2007), the Court held at [75]: "In view of the risk of abuse intrinsic to any
system of secret surveillance, such measures must be based on a law that is
particularly precise. It is essential to have clear, detailed rides on the subject,
especially as the technology available for us is continually becoming more
sophisticated [...]".

c.	These requirements apply not only to the collection of material, but also to its
treatment after it has been obtained, including the "procedure to be followed for
selecting for examination, sharing, storing and destroying intercepted material"
(Liberty v UK (2009) 48 EHRR 1 at [69]).

d.	In Weber the ECHR held at [93-94]: "The domestic law must be sufficiently clear in
its terms to give citizens an adequate indication as to the circumstances in which and
the conditions on which public authorities are empowered to resort to any such
measures [...] Moreover, since the implementation in practice of measures of secret
surveillance of communications is not open to scrutiny by the individuals concerned
or the public at large, it would be contrary to the rule of law for the legal discretion
granted to the executive or to a judge to be expressed in terms of an unfettered power.
Consequently, the law must indicate the scope of any such discretion conferred on the
competent authorities and the manner of its exercise with sufficient clarity to give the
individual adequate protection against arbitrary interference."

e.	The Court continued in Weber by setting out the matters which any legal
regime governing secret surveillance must expressly address in statute in
order to be regarded as lawful:

14

95 In its case law on secret measures of surveillance, the Court has developed
the following minimum safeguards that should be set out in statute law in
order to avoid abuses of power: the nature of the offences which may give rise
to an interception order; a definition of the categories of people liable to have
their telephones tapped; a limit on the duration of telephone tapping; the
procedure to be followed for examining, using and storing the data obtained;
the precautions to be taken when communicating the data to other parties;
and the circumstances in which recordings may or must be erased or the tapes
destroyed.

28.	These principles apply with equal effect to the requirement in Article 10 that the
interference be "in accordance with the law" (see, for example, Weber, at paragraph 147,
and Sunday Times v United Kingdom (1979) 2 EHRR 245, at paragraphs 48 and 49).

Domestic legal regime governing the relevant conduct

Regulation oflnvestigatonj Powers Act 2000

29.	RIPA 2000 regulates, among other things, the interception of communications in the
course of transmission (Part I Chapter I), the acquisition of communication data from
persons providing a telecommunication service (Part I Chapter II), and intrusive
surveillance and covert human intelligence sources (Part II), in the UK.

30.	Part I Chapter I empowers the Secretary of State to issue warrants for the
interception of communications under s.5, if he considers the interception necessary
on a number of listed grounds, including national security, and proportionate to the
aim to be achieved.

31.	Section 2(2) RIPA 2000 defines "interception" as follows:

"a person intercepts a communication in the course of its transmission by means of a
telecommunication system if, and only if, he -

(a)	so modifies or interferes with the system, or its operation,

(b)	so monitors transmissions made by means of the system, or

(c)	so monitors transmissions made by wireless telegraphy to or from
apparatus comprised in the system,

15

as to make some or nil of the contents of the communication nvnilnble, while being
transmitted, to n person other than the sender or intended recipient of the
communication."

32.	That might extend to some of the effects of the conduct at issue in this complaint -
for instance, if malware were implanted and then used in order to record a phone
call while it is being made - but it does not cover most of the functions described in
the leaked documents. For example, the extraction of documents from a hard disk or
a mobile device would not be tire interception of a communication in the course of its
transmission; it might involve the collection by GCHQ of information which the
affected individual never intended to share with anyone. Likewise, the ability to
activate a user's camera or microphone without his knowledge would not involve
the interception of any communication. Accordingly, it cannot be said that the
implanting of malware is merely a modification "so [...] ns to make some or nil of the
contents of the communication nvnilnble while being transmitted".

33.	RIPA Part I Chapter II covers the acquisition and disclosure of "communication dntn",
namely data held by a person providing a telecommunication service (section 21(4)).
That is clearly not engaged.

34.	Part II is not engaged either; s.48(3) provides that "References in tins Pnrt to surveillnnce
do not include references to [...] (c) nny such entry on or interference with property or with
wireless telegrnphy as woidd be unlawful unless authorised under - (i) section 5 of the
Intelligence Services Act 1994 In a case involving interference with property by
GCHQ, which (as set out below) is governed by the Intelligence Services Act 1994,
that exemption applies. In any event, nowhere in Part II is there any reference to the
manipulation of electronic devices belonging to others; the Act is clearly aimed at a
different kind of information-gathering, its interpretation provisions referring to
"monitoring, observing or listening to persons, their movements, their conversations or their
other activities or communications", either by officials alone or "by or with the assistance
of a surveillance device" (s.48(2)), and only in certain circumstances "the interception of a
communication in the course of its transmission". As an interference with fundamental
rights it cannot lightly be construed as covering an entirely different kind of
information-gathering: R (Simms) v SSHD [2000] 2 AC 115. In any event, it does not
even arguably extend to activity such as the collection and extraction of documents.

16

Computer Misuse Act 1990

35.	It is an offence under s.l(l) Computer Misuse Act 1990 ("CMA 1990") to cause a
computer to perform any function with intent to secure access to any program or
data held in it, or to enable any such access to be secured, if the access is
unauthorised and known to be unauthorised. (The term "computeV is not defined in
the Act, but in another statutory context was held by Lord Hoffmann in DPP v
McKeoum [1997] 1 WLR 295 to mean "a device for storing, processing and retrieving
information". Modern mobile devices, which are far more sophisticated than the
desktop computers available when the Act was passed, would surely qualify.)

36.	Further, under s.3 CMA 1990 it is an offence to do any unauthorised act in relation to
a computer, in the knowledge that it is unauthorised, if (i) the intention is to impair
the operation of the computer, to prevent or hinder access to any program or data, to
impair the operation of any program or the reliability of any data, or to enable any of
those things, or (ii) the perpetrator is reckless as to whether the act will do any of
those tilings. S.3(5) clarifies that the relevant effects may be only temporary, and also
that a reference to doing an act includes a reference to causing an act to be done. The
result is that the infection of a computer pursuant to an automated process would
still be an offence on the part of the person who commenced or directed that process.
The intrusion at issue here impairs the operation of the target computers in multiple
ways, including by draining battery life and using bandwidth and other computer
resources.

37.	S.10 CMA 1990 provides that section 1(1) "has effect without prejudice to the operation (a)
in England and Wales of any enactment relating to powers of inspection, search or seizure;
and (b) in Scotland of any enactment or rule of law relating to powers of examination, search
or seizure." However, this override does not apply to section 3(1). Therefore, at least
to the extent that such activities occur in England and Wales, any GCHQ activities
that impair the operation of a computer - for instance, by leaving it vulnerable to
future exploitation, as explained above are prima facie unlawful.

Intelligence Services Act 1994

38.	S.3 ISA 1994 provides the statutory basis for GCHQ and delineates its statutory
functions. Those functions include "to monitor or interfere with electromagnetic, acoustic

17

and other emissions and any equipment producing such emissions and to obtain and provide
[to various organisations] information derived from or related to such emissions or equipment
and from encrypted material". By s.3(2) those functions are exercisable only in the
interests of national security, the economic well-being of the United Kingdom in
relation to the actions or intentions of persons outside the British Islands, or in
support of the prevention or detection of serious crime.

39.	S.4(2) requires the Director of GCHQ to ensure "that there are arrangements for securing
that no information is obtained by GCHQ except so far as necessary for the proper discharge
of its functions and that no information is disclosed by it except so far as necessary for that
purpose or for the purpose of any criminal proceedings."

40.	S.5(l) provides: "No entry on or interference with property or with wireless telegraphy shall
be unlawful if it is authorised by a warrant issued by the Secretary of State under this
section." The Secretary of State may issue such a warrant on the application of GCHQ
in respect of any action, provided he "thinks it necessary for the action to be taken for the
purpose of assisting [...] GCHQ in carrying out [its statutory functions]," "is satisfied that
the taking of the action is proportionate to what the action seeks to achieve", and is satisfied
that satisfactory arrangements are in force with respect to section 4(2) in relation to
onward disclosure.

41.	In other words, the apparent legal basis for the activity at issue in this complaint is an
extremely broad power on the part of the Secretary of State to render lawful what
would otherwise be unlawful.

18

Ground 1: In accordance with law/ prescribed by law

42.	As already indicated, the activities in question have the potential to be more
intrusive than any other form of surveillance or data-gathering. The amount of
information stored on mobile phones and computers is vast, and much of it will be
highly personal in nature,

43.	Unlike the monitoring of communications, these activities enable GCHQ to obtain
that information whether or not the affected individual has ever chosen to share it
with anyone. Moreover, the logging of keystrokes and the covert activation of
cameras and microphones enable GCHQ to obtain further potentially sensitive
information whether or not the affected individual has ever chosen even to store it.

44.	A user may not even know of the full extent of what his computers or mobile devices
store. A mobile phone may, for instance, log all his historical geographical
movements as well as his current location. For instance, if he went for a job interview
or a medical appointment during work hours, that would be logged regardless of
whether there were any other record of that interview or appointment having been
arranged.

45.	Further:

a.	the fact that computers and devices are vulnerable to intrusion in this way
will inevitably discourage people from using the internet freely, and in
particular those individuals and organisations who may have wished to
correspond with Privacy International about legitimate activity in the sphere
of privacy protection;

b.	the potential vulnerabilities resulting from the forcible infection of devices
and the necessary weakening of security that such manipulation involves
have the potential to produce further interferences beyond those which
GCHQ directly controls;

c.	the potential for GCHQ to take over a compromised device altogether,
potentially altering its contents, raises serious concerns about the integrity of
any evidence from such sources that might be used in legal proceedings, and

19

the mechanisms would should be established and enforced in order to ensure
that that integrity is protected;

d.	as a matter of general principle, the fact that computer hacking involves
sophisticated technology and concepts which were unknown 20 years ago
strongly militates in favour of a requirement that it be governed by an
appropriate legal framework developed with that technology and those
concepts in mind.

46.	Accordingly, it is if anything more necessary than in an ordinary 'interception' case
that there be a clear legal framework governing activities of this sort.

47.	There is no such framework. The only statutory scheme dealing expressly with the
unauthorised infection of computers was established in 1990. Far from establishing a
Convention-compliant framework within which such infection is to be permissible
on certain conditions and with certain safeguards, it makes clear that GCHQ's
activity is simply unlawful in the absence of a supervening provision. The
availability of a warrant under ISA 1994 that simply cancels any unlawfulness is self-
evidently not an adequate safeguard.

48.	There is no Code of Practice governing the circumstances in which intrusion will be
permitted, by what means, against whom, in response to what level of suspicion and
for what kind of misconduct, or for how long their systems will be permitted to
remain compromised. Nor is there anything governing the procedure to be followed
in selecting for examination, sharing, storing and destroying any material obtained
(Liberty at [69]), or anything governing the relationship between GCHQ's programme
and the equivalent programmes being pursued by the NSA, FRA, and potentially
others. Even if it is strictly speaking permissible as a matter of construction of
domestic law (which, given the Defendants have not yet advanced any such case, is
not admitted), it falls short of the requirements of the rule of law and of Articles 8
and 10 of the Convention.

Ground 2: Disproportionality of interference

49.	Given the limited availability of the details of GCHQ's activity (still less the
purported legal basis for it) to Privacy International at this stage, Privacy

20

International must reserve the right to make more detailed submissions on the
disproportionality of the interference in due course.

50.	For present purposes it is sufficient to say that the nature of the interference, as set
out above, is far more serious than the interception of communications and, if left
unchecked, amounts to one of the most intrusive forms of surveillance any
government has conducted, hi allowing GCHQ to extract a huge amount of
information (current and historical), much of which an individual may never have
chosen to share with anybody, and to turn a user's own devices against him by co-
opting them as instruments of video and audio surveillance, it is at least as intrusive
as searching a person's house and installing bugs so as to enable continued
monitoring. In fact, it is more intrusive, because of the amount of information now
generated and stored by computers and mobile devices, the speed, ease and
surreptitiousness with which surveillance can be conducted, and because it allows
the ongoing surveillance to continue wherever the affected person may be. In those
circumstances any justification would have to be extremely specific and compelling
in order to render that activity proportionate to any legitimate aim. All the
indications so far are that the activity goes far beyond any such justification.

51.	Furthermore, such intrusion into "millions" of devices is highly unlikely to be
proportionate to any legitimate aim even if logic has been applied to the selection of
those devices. If, as is more likely, GCFIQ has simply taken advantage of its tools in
order to infect large numbers of devices near-indiscriminately, then it will be even
more obviously disproportionate.

52.	Moreover, the lack of safeguards mentioned above - in particular the apparent lack
of any restriction on the extent or duration of the infection of any particular device -
tends strongly against any finding that the interference is proportionate to any
legitimate aim.

Conclusion

53.	Privacy International seeks the following orders (which, again, may have to be
supplemented or amended in light of further disclosures):

21

a.	A declaration that GCHQ's intrusion into computers and mobile devices is
unlawful and contrary to Articles 8 and 10 ECHR;

b.	An order requiring the destruction of any unlawfully obtained material;

c.	An injunction restraining further unlawful conduct.

22