 German, NBA Share UNI Processing Knowledge



SUSLAG [Special US Liaison Activitv Gerinanv}
Run Date: 

A delegation responsible for building BND's next generation DNI
[Digital Network Intelligence} processing architecture visited the Joint SIGINT
Activitv in late Februarv for two days oi'discussions to learn more about

lof'j

NEA's DNI architecture. The JEA, an operational element of the Special UE Liaison
Activity Germany is ajoint EIGINT development, collection, and
exploitation site manned by German and US personnel.

END discussed their processing architecture, which is largely
based on NEA's old P25 and P26 GRANDMAETER prototypes. Their focus is
primarily e-mail processing, speci?cally EMTP e-mail. Epam ?lters are used to
manage large data volumes. Selected tra?ic is passed through an automated
privacy protection system, ensuring that cannot view German-protected
tra?ic. Dn-site END then manually assess all selected tra?ic to determine
potential intelligence value.

In conducting this evaluation, they do not prioritize the selected traf?c by
target or keyword. Instead they focus on e-mails carrying attachments with the
goal to scan e-mails as quickly as possible to increase their throughput. E-mails
that are determined to be ofpotential intelligence value are then forwarded to END
HQE for follow-on evaluation and reporting.

NEA intelligence discussed NEA's EIGINT Development model,
NEA's "Hunt versus Gather" philosophy, our multi-stage selection and ?ltering
process, and the evolution processing systems from GRANDMAETER to
WEALTHYELUETER and, in the future, TURMDIL. The END appeared especially
interested in the TURMDIL approach of scanning and making judgments at the
packet level prior to any sessionising.

In summary, NBA and END use opposite selection and ?ltering
approaches. Where NEA primarily relies on equipment for selection 
and analyst minimisation for privacy protection, the END relies on
to manually scan tra?ic for selection, and then equipment to ?lter data for
privacy protection. Full use of current NEA DNI processing systems and analysis
methodologies at JEA will be key to influencing the END to alter their strategic DNI
processing approach.

Note: END Germany's Eundesnachrichtendienst [the Federal Intelligence
Service}

 

This article is reprinted from the Foreign A?hirs Digest, April edition.

Eof'j

3of3

