TOP SECRET STRAP1

THQ/1202THQ/1900/0058
29 February 2008

popular PRIME TIME, looks for cross-media timing chains, e.g. a telephone call
triggers a chat event.

ACTION: Ran out of time for discussion - to be brought back for next PSTG
session.

•	KARMA POLICE - submitted at TRL 4.

KARMA POLICE aims to correlate every user visible to passive SIGINT with
every website they visit, hence providing either (a) a web browsing profile for every
visible user on the internet, or (b) a user profile for every visible website on the
internet.

For more details, refer to high-level overview document B/6760BA/5001/1.

Initial work with INOC shows high analyst usage of technique.

ACTION: To be progressed as a Better Analysis theme based requirement for
explore.

- noted that the legalities with respect to ‘content’ need to be cleared.

•	ORB FINDER submitted at TRL 4.

Enables the identification of potential candidate Operational Relay Boxes (ORBs)
for use in CNE’s active exploitation network through passive logging, providing a
richer picture of the end-system, and consequently reducing CNE’s active footprint by
focussing attention to those candidates that meet a stricter set of criteria.

ACTION : To be progressed as a CNE theme based requirement for explore.

• MOOSE MILK ^^^^^^^M'MOOSE MILK - submitted at TRL 4.

A data mining algorithm devised by CTOR to detect suspicious use of telephone
kiosks in the UK. MOOSE MILK is currently being developed further by the
Operational Data Minina team in OPD-TAT.

ACTION: To be progressed as a Better Analysis Agility requirement for explore.

- noted that the timeliness of the tool depends on feeds in near-real time,
which have not been available so far.

LIGHTWOOD
a TRL rating given operational usage within JTRIG.

LIGHTWOOD - submitted to allocate

Extracts act email addresses from any character stream. What differentiates
LIGHTWOOD is its ability to distinguish valid email formats from those that appear to
be email addresses but are not for open Internet (e.g. better@management).

2	of 3

This information is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and
other UK information legislation. Refer disclosure requests to GCHQ



to exemi

under

TOP SECRET STRAP1