TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
CENTRAL SECURITY SERVICE

(U) CLASSIFICATION GUIDE FOR
QUANTUM COMPUTING RESEARCH
10-25

Effective Date: 21 September 2011

Revised Date(s):

CLASSIFIED BY: 

 

REASON FOR CLASSIFICATION: 1.4 
DECLASSIFY ON: 25 years"

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

(U) Change Register

Date Made By
mm/dd/yy (initials)

Change No. Change

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

CLASSIFICATION GUIDE (U) Quantum Computing
Research, 10-25

PUBLICATION DATE: (U) 21 September 2011

OFFICE OF ORIGIN: (U) The Laboratory for Physical Sciences/R3

Poe: (move) 
ORIGINAL CLASSIFICATION AUTHORITY: (U) 

Community Integration, Policy and Records

This document establishes information security guidelines on NSA/CSS-Sponsored
research in the ?eld of quantum computing (QC). The objectives de?ning the scope of this
research activity are:

l) To assess if it is to bene?t to continue research into Whether
practical-scale QC can be developed Within a reasonable timeframe, to identify its most
promising physical embodiment(s), and to formulate a credible scenario for its large-scale
development;

2) To gain an understanding of the computational capabilities
of quantum computers; and

3) To identify practical methods that are not susceptible to
quantum computational attack.

These guidelines do not cover the possibility of large-scale QC
development programs at NSA, but only the research and planning preliminary to, and in
possible support of, such programs.

Much of the research in quantum computing is still very basic and is most
effectively pursued in NSA-funded open research programs. These programs play a critical role
as the major source of new ideas and for training future researchers in the ?eld. However, NSA
is pursuing more than just basic, unclassi?ed research. NSA is also attempting to preserve the
SIGINT potential of quantum computing the applications of QC) While
Simultaneously attempting to protect the information security of both the Government and
private sectors against hostile QC attacks the mission assurance applications
of QC of interest to the Information Assurance community). These goals must be pursued at the
classi?ed level.

There are several fundamental reasons for classifying QC research:
1) To protect efforts to develop QC to attack high-

grade public key systems by denying adversaries information concerning
assessment of, and/or plans for, large-scale QC development;

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

2) To enable us to track our adversaries? degree of success or failure in similar
QC development efforts; and

3) To protect our own systems against adversarial QC efforts.

Based on this, the distinctions between unclassi?ed and classi?ed information
contained in this guide attempt to differentiate between unclassi?ed basic-level, academic-scale
research of scienti?c interest, and more comprehensive classi?ed research which might disclose
techniques that may otherwise be possible to protect, or which might imply, or wrongly,
serious intent on part to pursue large-scale development of quantum

computers.

 

Description of Information

Classi?cation/
Markings

Category

Declass

Remarks

 

A. (U) General

 

A.l. (U) The fact that NSA:

0 (U) Acknowledges the
potential of Quantum
Computing (QC) in the ?eld of


0 (U) Tracks the development of
QC technology.

0 (U) Conducts QC research.

0 (U) Funds selected QC
research of unspeci?ed
external entities.

0 (U) Conducts and sponsors
research in QC mathematics
and algorithms, complexity
theory, experimental physics,
theoretical physics, control,
and/ or error correction.

0 (U) Discusses QC theory with
unspeci?ed external
researchers within and outside
the United States.

UNCLAS IFIED





(U) Details may require handling
as 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY or may be
classi?ed.

 

A2. The fact that
NSA conducts unspecified
classi?ed research in QC with no
additional details.

UNCLAS FOR
OFFICIAL USE ONLY





(U) Details may require
classi?cation and may be
compartmented.

 

(U) Cooperation With Other Organizations

 

 

A3. The fact that
NSA cooperates with other US.
organizations (6. g. academic
organizations, national
laboratories, and other US.
intelligence agencies) on basic,
unclassi?ed QC research without

 

UNCLAS IFIED

 



 



 

(U) Details, including specifying
which US. organization, may
require handling as

OFFICIAL USE ONLY or may be
classi?ed.

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

 

additional details.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A.4. The fact that Details, such as the
NSA cooperates with the Second FOR OFFICIAL USE particulars of research jointly
Party partners on basic, ONLY undertaken by NSA and a
unclassi?ed QC research without speci?ed Second Party partner,
additional details. may be classi?ed.
A.5. The fact that (U) Details, including specifying
NSA cooperates with other US. FOR OFFICIAL USE which US. organizations or
organizations academic ONLY Second Party partners, may be
organizations, national classi?ed. Coordination with the
laboratories, and other US. See Remarks other party may be required to
intelligence agencies) or Second arrive at a mutually-agreeable
Party partners, on classi?ed QC classi?cation.
research.
(U) Research Information
A.6. (U) Details regarding or UNCLASSIFIED (U) Information is generally
results of NSA-conducted or UNCLASSIFIED, except for
-spons0red unclassi?ed research. See Remarks information on breakthroughs. See
A. 12 below.

A.7. Non-technical 1.4 25 years* (U) Details may require higher
details scheduling) regarding REL TO USA, FVEY classi?cation.
NSA-conducted or -sp0ns0red at a minimum
classi?ed QC research.
A.8. Technical details TO 1.4 25 years* (U) Details 
regarding or results USA, FVEY applications) on speci?c research
conducted or -spons0red classi?ed at a minimum may require higher classi?cation
QC research. and/0r compartmentation.
A.9. (U) The existence of a 1.4 25 years* (U) Higher classi?cation and/or
speci?c classi?ed QC research REL TO USA, FVEY compartmentation may be required
project. at a minimum to protect speci?c projectsyears* For example, the fact
information relating to a USA, FVEY that NSA decides to fund or not to
determination that minimum fund a speci?c classi?ed QC
useful to NSA. research project would be

See Remarks classi?ed TO

USA, FVEY or higher.

A. 1. (U) The reason for a 1.4 25 years* (U) Details may require higher
signi?cant change in size or REL TO USA, FVEY classi?cation and/0r
direction of the NSA QC research at a minimum compartmentation.
program.
(U) Breakthroughs
A. 12. The fact of or (U) Analysis by NSA of the
speci?c details of changes in OFFICIAL USE ONLY signi?cance of a breakthrough will
understanding of the at a minimum normally require classi?cation
likelihood, timescale, required (generally at the TO
resources, or method of See Remarks USA, FVEY level at a minimum)
implementation of and/0r compartmentation.
scale QC because of a
breakthrough achieved through
Open research.
A. 13. The fact of a TO 1.4 25 years* (U) Details and signi?cance of the
change in understanding of USA, FVEY breakthrough may require higher

the likelihood, timescale, required
resources, or method of
implementation of 

 

at a minimum

See Remarks

 

 

 

classi?cation and/ or additional
compartmentation.

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

 

scale QC because of a
breakthrough achieved through
classi?ed research.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. 14. The speci?c TOP 1.4 25 years* (U) Details and signi?cance of the
details of a change in REL TO USA, FVEY breakthrough may require
understanding of the likelihood, at a minimum additional compartmentation 
timescale, required resources, or a method of implementation may
method of implementation of See Remarks leverage additional equities
scale QC because of protected under a compartment).
a breakthrough achieved through
classi?ed research.
B. (U) Level A/Level QC Research
B.l. (U) The fact that NSA UNCLASSIFIED (U) See the descriptions of Level
conducts Level A and Level QC A and Level in the De?nitions
research with no additional details. section.
B.2. The fact that 
Level A is unclassi?ed QC OFFICIAL USE ONLY
research and/0r Level is
classi?ed QC research.
B.3. The fact that NSA TO 1.4 25 years*
de?nes speci?c limits to USA, FVEY
distinguish Level A QC research
from Level QC research.
B.4. The speci?c values TO 1.4 25 years* The values are
distinguishing Level A QC USA, FVEY expected to change over time
research from Level QC based on achievements in the Open
research. community.
C. (U) QC Algorithm Research
C. 1. (U) The fact that NSA- UNCLASSIFIED Publically known
conducted or -spons0red at a minimum algorithms are generally
unclassi?ed research has achieved unclassi?ed. However, because of
a quantum algorithm improvement See Remarks their relevance to NSA's QC effort
of an unclassi?ed classical or capabilities,
algorithm with polynomial run- improvements to an unclassi?ed
time. algorithm may be protected as
determined on a case-by-case
basis. Contact guide POC.
(U) General algorithm research
falls under this category.
C.2. (U) The fact that NSA- UNCLASSIFIED Publically known

conducted or -spons0red
unclassi?ed research has achieved
a quantum algorithm improvement
of an unclassi?ed classical
algorithm yielding a polynomial
speed-up.

 

at a minimum

See Remarks

 

 

 

algorithms are generally
unclassi?ed. However, because of
their relevance to NSA's QC effort
or capabilities,
improvements to an unclassi?ed
algorithm may be protected as
determined on a case-by-case
basis. Contact guide POC.

A polynomial speed-
up Of an unclassi?ed algorithm
may make some intractable
problems tractable.

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C.3. (U) The fact that NSA- UNCLASSIFIED Publically known

conducted or -spons0red at a minimum algorithms are generally

unclassi?ed research has achieved unclassi?ed. However, because of

a quantum algorithm improvement See Remarks their relevance to NSA's QC effort

of a classical algorithm yielding a or capabilities,

super-polynomial speed-up. improvements to an unclassi?ed
algorithm may be protected as
determined on a case-by-case
basis by the originating Agency.
Contact guide POC.
(U) For example, a polynomial
time algorithm for solving Graph
Isomorphism.

C.4. The fact that UNCLASSIFIED (U) For example, it is known that

NSA has determined that a QC breaks based on

speci?c classical public-key RSA, Dif?e-Hellman, and elliptic

design is or is not curve 

secure against QC attack where

the security or non-security of the (U) For assistance in

algorithms is widely known and determination, contact guide POC.

publicly available.

C.5. The fact that USA, 1.4 25 years* (U) Speci?c designs may require

NSA has determined that a FVEY higher classi?cation and/or

speci?c classical public-key at a minimum compartmentation

design is or is not

secure against QC attack for See Remarks

algorithms for which the security

or non-security is not widely

known and publicly available.

D. (U) Programs and Plans

D.l. The existence TOP 1.4 25 years* (U) Details indicating speci?c

or nonexistence of any NSA plan REL TO USA, FVEY planning or program development

or program to build a at a minimum may require compartmentation.

scale quantum

computer. See Remarks

E. (U) Information Assurance

E.l. (U) The fact of a vulnerability TOP SECRET 1.4 25 years* (U) Refer to the Information

of a speci?c US. Government Assurance Vulnerabilities and

to QC attack. See Remarks Weaknesses Classi?cation Guide.
3-02, 8 July 2005, concerning
foreign releasability of
information on 
vulnerabilities of US. systems.

E.2. (U) The fact that NSA is UNCLASSIFIED (U) Details may require handling

attempting to design classical as 

public-key that is See Remarks OFFICIAL USE ONLY or may be

secure against QC attack. classi?ed.

F. (U) Materials

F.l. (U) The fact of NSA UNCLASSIFIED 

involvement in developing
specialized materials for
unclassi?ed QC that would not

 

 

 

 

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

 

involve developing specialized
production facilities.

 

 

 

 

F.2. The fact TO 1.4 25 years* Such development

involvement in developing USA, FVEY might include, but is not limited

specialized materials for classi?ed to, isotopic or impurity

QC. See Remarks puri?cation, defect reduction,
and/0r surface passivation.

F.3. The fact TO 1.4 25 years* Development of such

involvement in developing USA, FVEY production plants indicates a level

specialized materials for classi?ed of NSA commitment to

QC that would See Remarks QC development

involve developing or using beyond unclassi?ed research.

specialized production facilities or

prototypes of such facilities.

F.4. Technical details 1.4 25years* Resulting specialized

regarding NSA development of
specialized materials for

QC.

 

REL TO USA, FVEY
at a minimum

See Remarks

 

 

 

materials will generally be
handled as 

REL TO USA, 
exceptionally high-purity material
or experimental results may
require protection as TOP
TO USA,
FVEY.

 

(U) Declassification in 25 years indicates that the information is classi?ed for 25 years from
the date a document is created or 25 years from the date of this original classi?cation decision,

whichever is later.

(U) DEFINITIONS

(U) - The study of breaking codes and ciphers.

- (as applied to quantum computers) Large enough to perform
computations of actual importance to NSA. A more speci?c de?nition is likely to
be compartmented, and will change over time.

(U) - The principles, means, and methods for rendering plain information
unintelligible to the uninitiated and for restoring information to intelligible form.

(U) - The art and science of making codes/ciphers and breaking them,. 
breaks out into two disciplines: (making or using codes/ciphers) and 

(breaking codes/ciphers).

(U) Detailed engineering design - Speci?cations of a set of qubits and the associated
initialization, control, and measurement hardware and software at a level of detail commensurate
with the requirements of industrial fabrication.

(U) Fidelity - Precision of qubit Operations such as initialization, logic gates, and readout.

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

 

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

(U) High-?delity N?qubit Device - An engineered processing device that integrates coupled,
high-?delity physical qubits, qubits with ?delity of Operations near or beyond the accuracy
threshold for efficient error correction.

Level A QC - Unclassi?ed theoretical and/or experimental research in the design,
physical implementation, and Operation of quantum computers, as established by the Laboratory
for Physical Sciences/R3.

Level QC - Classi?ed theoretical and/or experimental research in the design,
physical implementation, and Operation of quantum computers, as established by the Laboratory
for Physical Sciences/R3. The boundaries are based on the number and quality of qubits, realism
and speci?city of design, control precision, and detail of analysis. While these boundaries may
change over time, as of the publication of this guide, the values are:

(1) Detailed engineering design of 51 or more physical qubits;

(2) Implementation and Operation Of a high-?delity 21-Or-more physical-qubit
device; or

(3) Implementation and Operation of three (3) or more logical qubits, with
suf?cient speed and precision to allow preservation of quantum information and logical
gates between the qubits.

(U) Logical qubits - Collections of several physical qubits con?gured in a circuit allowing
detection and correction both of errors and of loss of quantum coherence.

(U) For the purposes of this guide, the circuit configuration of a logical qubit must allow
detection and correction of at least all errors affecting any single physical qubit. A logical
qubit comprising physical qubits must also be a high-?delity N-qubit device.

(U) Physical qubit - A physical entity capable of storing a qubit of information and being
initialized, operated on, and measured. Examples include, but are not limited to: photons,
electrons, atoms, atomic nuclei, and superconducting Josephson junctions.

Practical-Scale - with the added requirement that a roadmap
exists to construct the device with a cost, probability of success, and time-scale of actual
importance to NSA. A more specific de?nition is likely to change over time.

(U) Quantum coherence - The fundamental quantum-mechanical property of qubits and
collections of qubits which may enable some computations to be performed with resources vastly

smaller than would be required for classical computers.

(U) Quantum Computing - Computing with quantum Operations on data stored in a collection
of qubits.

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

(U) Quantum gates - Logic operations on one or more qubits that preserve their quantum
coherent character.

(U) Qubit - A ?quantum bit,? the fundamental unit of information in a quantum computer.

TOP TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL

