On behalf of	: First Defendant
Witness	: Oliver Robbins
No. of statement:	: I
Dated	: 27 August 2013

CO/11732/2013

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT

R

on the application of

DAVID MICHAEL DOS SANTOS MIRANDA

Claimant

and

(1) SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
(2) COMMISSIONER OF POLICE FOR THE METROPOLIS

Defendants

First Witness Statement of Oliver Robbins

I. Oliver Robbins, of 70 Whitehall, London SW1A 2AS WILL SAY as follows:

1.	lam the Deputy National Security Adviser for Intelligence, Security and Resilience in the
Cabinet Office. I report directly to the Prime Minister, the National Security Council and the
National Security Adviser, Sir Kim Darroch.

2.	I have been a member of the civil service for the last 17 years and am a Senior Civil Servant.
I have served in a number of roles across government, including serving as the Prime
Minister's Principal Private Secretary.

3.	In my current role I am responsible for policy, resourcing and capability matters relating to
the United Kingdom's security and intelligence agencies. I oversee the annual setting of the
security and intelligence agencies' requirements and priorities and I represent the United
Kingdom in international intelligence and security fora. 1 advise the National Security
Council on counter-terrorism and counter-espionage issues. 1 am also responsible for
managing the United Kingdom's crisis management machinery, for producing the
Government's security policies (including those which govern protection of the assets of the
security and intelligence agencies) and 1 manage the UK's National Cyber Security
Programme.

4.	I am authorised to make this witness statement on behalf of the first defendant in opposition
to the claimant’s application for interim relief in these proceedings. 1 make this statement
from my own knowledge and where matters are not within my own knowledge from
information and documentation made available to me and from consultations with other parts
of Government. The facts set out in this statement are tine to the best of my knowledge and
belief.

5.	This witness statement seeks to outline why the defendants need to make use of the material
that was detained pursuant to paragraph 11 of Schedule 7 to the Terrorism Act 2000, pending
final determination of these proceedings and the risk to national security if the interim relief
sought by the claimant is granted. Specifically, this statement explains:

•	the background to the material seized;

•	HMG's best assessment in an open statement of the harm we fear would be caused by
disclosure of the material seized;

•	as an example of this damage, the concern we have to protect intelligence officer
identities;

•	why HMG needs continuing access to the material to mitigate current and future risks
to national security;

•	how this access also supports the continuing criminal investigation;

•	why it would further risk national security to return the material; and

•	HMG’s approach to the material held by The Guardian newspaper, which the
claimant alleges is inconsistent.

2

6.	I would like to make clear at the outset that no information that has so far been analysed by
Her Majesty's Government (“HMG”) has identified a journalist source or has contained any
items prepared by a journalist with a view to publication. The information that has been
accessed consists entirely of misappropriated classified material in the form of approximately
58.000 highly classified UK intelligence documents. 1 can confirm that the disclosure of this
information would cause harm to UK national security.

Background

7.	The claimant is the partner of Glenn Greenwald, who writes for (amongst other publications)
The Guardian newspaper. There are two other individuals who are relevant to the background
of the present action, Laura Poitras and Edward Snowden.

8.	Mr Snowden was a former employee of the US Central Intelligence Agency (“CIA”) and a
contractor to the National Security Agency (“NSA"). It has been reported that Mr Snowden
was able to obtain a vast amount of classified material during his employment. Ms Poitras is
a documentary film maker, who, along with Mr Greenwald, is believed to have access to this
intelligence information.

9.	There has been a great deal of open source reporting concerning the classified material that
was obtained by Mr Snowden and the roles of the claimant, Mr Greenwald and Ms Poitras.
In describing the background to the circumstances of this claim I will therefore refer to this
open source material.

10.	In a newspaper article published by The Guardian on 19 August 2013 ("Glenn Greenwald:
detaining my partner was a failed attempt at intimidation"), Mr Greenwald stated that the
claimant had spent the week before his detention at Heathrow Airport in Berlin, where he
stayed with Ms Poitras, whom he described as having worked with him extensively on the
stories relating to surveillance by the NSA.

11.	In an article published on the same day by the Columbia Journalism Review ("Guardian
bombshells in an escalating battle against journalism") Ryan Chittum wrote that the claimant
"was serving as a human passenger pigeon, shuttling encrypted files on USB drives between
filmmaker Laura Poitras and Greenwald". The statement that the claimant was acting as a
courier between Mr Greenwald and Ms Poitras was repeated by Joel Simon, Executive
Director of the Committee to Protect Journalists, in his letter of 20 August to the Prime
Minister. In an article published in The New York Times on 13 August ("How Laura Poitras
helped Snowden spill his secrets") Peter Maass stated that Mr Snowden gave Ms Poitras and

3

Mr Greenwald "thousands of classified documents", and that Ms Poitras and Mr Greenwald
"have not shared the full set of documents with anyone".

12.	Media reporting has suggested that the only complete copies of the classified material shared
with them by Mr Snowden are still held by Ms Poitras, in Germany, and Mr Greenwald, in
Brazil. HMG were aware that The Guardian possessed a subset of the material, although we
do not know how much.

13.	I am advised that the data recovered from the claimant is almost certain to contain some of
the material passed by Mr Snowden to Ms Poitras and Mr Greenwald. Much of the material
is encrypted. However, among the unencrypted documents recovered from the claimant was
a piece of paper containing basic instructions for accessing some data, together with a piece
of paper that included the password for decrypting one of the encrypted files on the external
hard drive recovered from the claimant. 1 have been briefed that the authorities have
therefore been able to examine the data contained in this file. They have been able to
determine that the external hard drive contains approximately 58,000 highly classified UK
intelligence documents. Work continues to access the content of the other files on the hard
drive and the USB sticks.

14.	The New York Times article by Peter Maass cited above states that Mr Snowden had access
to "not just a few secrets but thousands of them, because of [his] ability to scrape classified
networks". "Scraping" in this context refers to the automated bulk downloading of material
from a website or a network. On the basis of GCHQ assessments, the totality of UK
intelligence documents that would potentially have been accessible to Mr Snowden while he
was working at the NSA is consistent with the volume of documents which we know to be on
the external hard drive. HMG believes, therefore, that far from undertaking targeted and
careful appropriation of classified material, Mr Snowden indiscriminately appropriated
material in bulk and that this information, or at least some of it, is the same material that the
claimant was couriering for Mr Greenwald.

Risk to National Security - general 15

15.	It is not possible in an open statement to get into detail about the real and serious damage
already caused by the disclosures made based on Mr Snowden’s misappropriations, nor about
what damage could ensue if the material seized from the claimant were disclosed. However,
given the volume of open source reporting, and recent public statements from senior officials

4

ill both HMG and the US Government. 1 can say with confidence in this statement that the
material seized is highly likely to describe techniques which have been crucial in life-saving
counter-terrorist operations, and other intelligence activities vital to UK national security.
The compromise of these methods would do serious damage to UK national security, and
ultimately risk lives.

16.	For security and intelligence agencies engaged in covert activities to ensure the national
security of the United Kingdom, the protection of staff identities is critical to their operational
effectiveness and overall ability to discharge their statutory duties. Anything that reveals or
indicates the identities of members of UK security and intelligence agencies would be of
value to elements hostile to the national interest of the United Kingdom, including foreign
intelligence agencies and terrorists who actively seek such information. The interim relief
sought by the claimant would prevent urgent work to understand the magnitude of this risk
and, in particular, the ability to take steps to mitigate that risk. Greater detail on this specific
example is provided in paragraph 19 onwards below.

17.	In general terms, it can be said that a large proportion of the material is classified either at
SECRET or TOP SECRET. According to the Security Policy Framework, the compromise of
SECRET information would be likely to have one or more of the following consequences: to
raise international tension; seriously to damage relations with friendly governments; to
threaten life directly or seriously prejudice public order, or individual security or liberty; to
cause serious damage to the operational effectiveness of highly valuable security or
intelligence operations; and to cause substantial material damage to national finances or
economic and commercial interests. The compromise of TOP SECRET information would
be likely to have one or more of the following consequences: to threaten the internal stability
of the UK or friendly countries; to lead directly to widespread loss of life; to cause
exceptionally grave damage to the effectiveness or security of UK or allied forces or to the
continuing effectiveness of security or intelligence operations; to cause exceptionally grave
damage to relations with friendly governments; and to cause severe long-term damage to the
UK economy.

18.	The effect of disclosure is outlined in public guidance issued by the Defence, Press and
Broadcasting Advisory Committee (DPBAC) which oversees a voluntary code which
operates between HMG and the media for the purpose of preventing inadvertent disclosure of
information that would compromise UK military and intelligence operations and methods, or
put at risk those involved or endanger lives; and which guides the media to seek advice for
material falling within this category. Notice DA-05 of this code is as follows:

5

‘identified staff from the intelligence and security services, others engaged on sensitive
counter-terrorist operations, including the Special Forces, and those who are likely targets for
attack arc at real risk from terrorists. Security and intelligence operations contacts and
techniques are easily compromised, and therefore need to be pursued in conditions of secrecy.
Publicity about an operation which is in train finishes it. Publicity given even to an operation
which has been completed, whether successfully or not, may well deny the opportunity for
further exploitation of a capability, which may be unique against other hostile and illegal
activity. The disclosure of identities can prejudice past, present and future operations. Even
inaccurate speculation about the source of information on a given issue can put intelligence
operations (and, in the worst cases, lives at risk and/or lead to the loss of information which is
important in the interests of national security. Material which has been the subject of an
official announcement is not covered by this notice.”

Risk to National Security - an example

19.	A particular concern for HMG is the possibility that the identity of a UK intelligence officer
might be revealed. It is known that contained in the seized material are personal information
that would allow staff to be identified, including those deployed overseas. It would cause real
harm to the work of the UK’s security and intelligence agencies if an intelligence officer were
to have his or her identity disclosed on anything other than an authorised and limited basis.

20.	It is necessary for members of the UK intelligence agencies to continue to remain anonymous
as public identification of an officer could restrict the effectiveness of that individual in his or
her job, compromise others (including current and previous operations) or result in danger to
the persons concerned or their close associates. In a variety of circumstances, this danger
includes a risk to life, both to intelligence officers and their families and recruitment attempts
or threats to their safety by hostile intelligence services or terrorist groups.

21.	In respect of the threat from hostile intelligence services, HMG has had to assume that copies
of the information held by Mr Snowden may be held by one or more other States having
regard to Mr Snowden’s travel since leaving the United States. Given the variety of threats,
and the risk of abuse of the information relating to staff identities contained in the material
seized, I am advised that the information that has already been obtained has had a direct
impact on decisions taken in regard to staff deployments and is therefore impacting
operational effectiveness. Ongoing risk assessment work is required to limit or pre-empt
damage to national security. A fuller understanding of the totality of the data recovered from
the claimant will not of itself reduce this risk, but will enable HMG to conduct more accurate
risk assessments and to take steps accordingly.

6

Continued access to the information

22.	Continued access to, and analysis of, the detained material is required to understand how it
has been used and/or accessed to inform urgent action to protect UK national security. In
conducting this work it may be necessary to make additional copies of the data or to
otherwise afford greater access to it to allow more individuals to work on it or more
technology to be applied to it. It is important to emphasise to the court that 1 have been
briefed that this is not a simple process and, even given the very high priority that is being
placed on the work (which is, of course, diverting resources within the security and
intelligence agencies), this will take a considerable amount of time and will consume a large
amount of resources.

23.	While our examination of the file that we have decrypted has allowed us to determine that it
contains what we assess might be a complete set of the UK intelligence documents held on
one particular network, we have not identified within this file the documentary basis for
articles written by Mr Greenwald based on US intelligence documents (e.g. "NSA Prism
program taps in to user data of Apple, Google and others", The Guardian, 7 June). We
believe that it is likely that some or all of this US material is contained in the data held on the
USB sticks recovered from the claimant. We cannot rule out the possibility that additional
UK material, for example highly classified intelligence reporting held on other networks to
which HMG does not have direct access, may be included within it. We are seeking to
decrypt this data. 24

24.	It is not presently known how many copies of the material appropriated by Mr Snowden in
fact exist or exactly who holds them, but - as mentioned above - it is assessed that copies
may be held by one or more other States having regard to Mr Snowden's travel since leaving
the United States. Continued access to the material is therefore essential to try to establish
what threat to national security exists by virtue of the possession of this material by another
State. We urgently need to identify and to understand the entirety of the material recovered
from the claimant in order to assess the risks to sensitive intelligence sources and methods,
and the threat to intelligence agency staff should their identities or details of their operational
tradecraft be obtained by hostile actors.

7

Return of the information

25.	1 understand that the claimant is not seeking the return of the detained property as part of the
interim relief. However, in order to assist the court, I will also outline why the return of this
information would damage national security.

26.	Neither Mr Snowden nor Mr Greenwald has sufficient understanding of the work of the UK
security and intelligence agencies to be able to form a reliable judgement on what might or
might not, if published, damage the national security of the United Kingdom, whether the

. publication is based on UK intelligence material or US intelligence material. Indeed it is
impossible for a journalist alone to form a proper judgment about what disclosure of
protectively marked intelligence does or does not damage national security (hence the
longstanding Defence Advisory system described in paragraph 18, above). The fragmentary
nature of intelligence means that even a seemingly innocuous piece of information can
provide important clues to individuals involved in extremism or terrorism.

27.	There is therefore a real risk that publication or disclosure of the information could cause
unintended damage to that national security. It is worth reiterating the point that real damage
has in fact already been done to UK national security by the media revelations (both in the
UK and internationally)'.

28.	Even if the claimant were to undertake not to publish or disclose the information that has
been detained, the claimant and his associates have demonstrated very poor judgement in
their security arrangements with respect to the material rendering the appropriation of the
material, or at least access to it by other, non-State actors, a real possibility.

29.	From what has been published in the media, Mr Greenwald does not apply good information
security practice. An article published in the New York Times on 6 June 2013 ("Blogger,
with a focus on surveillance, is at center of a debate") noted that "Mr Greenwald has said he
has had to get up to speed in the security precautions that are expected from a reporter
covering national security matters, including installing encrypted instant chat and e-mail
programmes." The article quotes Mr Greenwald as saying "I am borderline illiterate on these
matters, but I had somebody who is really well-regarded actually come and physically do my
whole computer". The New York Times article of 13 August referred to above describes Mr
Greenwald's handling of material supplied to him by Mr Snowden while travelling to Hong
Kong: "On the plane, Greenwald began going through its contents, eventually coming across
a secret court order requiring Verizon to give its customer phone records to the N.S.A...

8

Poitras. sitting 20 rows behind Greenwald, occasionally went forward to talk about what be
was reading.... At times, they talked so animatedly that they disturbed passengers who were
trying to sleep".

30.	The fact that, as described earlier in paragraph 13, when arriving at Heathrow airport on 18
August the claimant was carrying on his person a handwritten a piece of paper containing the
password for one of the encrypted files recovered from him is a sign of very poor information
security practice. Such practices should be considered against the background of the
practices ol the security and intelligence agencies from which the material originates, where
great lengths are gone to with a view to protecting such information. This is achieved
through a combination of personnel security, physical security and information security.

31.	The retention by the defendants of the material seized from the claimant would effectively
remove the risk of its appropriation by others and would put it beyond the reach of hostile
intelligence services and non-state actors. It should be noted that the principal reason behind
the destruction of the material held by The Guardian was to address the risk of that material
being obtained by others, especially hostile intelligence services.

Criminal investigation

32.	At the Divisional Court hearing on 23 August 2013, the Metropolitan Police Service
announced that it had started a criminal investigation. As will be set out in the second
defendant’s statement that is due to be served today, the effect of the order sought by the
claimant would be to prevent the police from performing their core function: the prevention
and detection of crime. The police do not have the same level of experience, expertise and
technical capability as third parties, in particular GC’HQ, which are necessary to access the
data held on the electronic media seized by the second defendant. It is, therefore, essential
that both the police and third parties are able to work on the electronic media and the data it
contains for the purposes of the criminal investigation and to use as evidence in criminal
proceedings.

33.	The claimant has sought disclosure of the identity of any third party to whom access has been
given to any of the material and of what material has been disclosed to such third parties. As
is clear from this witness statement, the Metropolitan Police Service has given GCHQ access
to the data to assist the police in the performance of its statutory duties. The Metropolitan
Police Service has also requested support from the UK’s National Technical Assistance
Centre (“NTAC”). NTAC (which is formally part of GCHQ) provides law enforcement

9

agencies with a central facility for the complex processing of encrypted material, including
through the application of enhanced capabilities and techniques, to derive evidence from
seized electronic data.

34.	The police have also provided the material to the UK intelligence agencies under section 19
of the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008 which provides that a person may disclose information to
the any of the intelligence services (meaning the Security Service, the Secret Intelligence
Service and GCHQ) for the purposes of the exercise by that service of its specified functions.
The UK intelligence agencies may, in turn, disclose the information to a third party, including
selected foreign parties, in the exercise of their statutory functions. It may well be necessary
to disclose or provide access to the material seized by the police to foreign third parties to
support the UK intelligence agencies’ ability to access and to interpret the electronic media.
This will, in turn, facilitate the second defendant’s criminal investigation and support and
inform action to protect the UK’s national security. It is HMG’s longstanding practice not to
comment on the detail of intelligence exchanges with foreign partners, on the grounds that
doing so even in a limited and apparently harmless way would risk undermining the
immediacy and candour of such exchanges by raising fears among our partners as to the
security of their sources and methods, in turn risking UK national security.

The Guardian

35.	The claimant asserts that there is an inconsistency between his treatment by the UK
authorities and the approach taken towards The Guardian which, he believes, shows that there
is no urgency here. He relies on the statement by Mr Rusbridger [C5], The claimant’s
assertion is incorrect for the following reasons.

36.	HMG became aware, through the newspaper's own reporting, that The Guardian was in
possession of information passed to it. through a third party, by Mr Snowden. In addition,
The Guardian reported that this material included information originating from GCHQ. As
members of the Newspaper Publishers Association, wiiich sits on the DPBAC, the Guardian
Newspapers arc party to this agreement. It was therefore a matter of serious concern to us that
initial reporting by the Guardian which appeared in its print edition of 17 June 2013 (and
subsequently of 21 June) contained material damaging to the national security of the United
Kingdom. HMG was also very concerned that the newspaper also claimed it held much more
GCHQ information than the material it had already reported on.

10

37.	HMG was deeply concerned at the prospect of sensitive intelligence material being outside its
protection. It was certain that disclosure of this type of information could cause grievous
harm to national security and counter-terrorism operations, as well as posing a direct threat to
life of UK government employees. The Government decided to engage the newspaper
quickly to address our immediate and overriding objective: to mitigate the risk of a
potentially catastrophic stream of public reporting of intelligence material.

38.	Following publication on 17 June, the actual and potential damage caused was discussed at
the highest level of Government leading to direct engagement with the Guardian during the
course of that week. These discussions continued to the conclusion of the engagement.

39.	Once our principal objective had been achieved, HMG resolved to take all reasonable steps to
recover the information and/or remove its potential to cause intended or unintended damage.
We wanted to achieve this as quickly as possible. Preferably the material would be retrieved
to help us to understand the extent of damage that might be caused by further disclosure and
damage that might have occurred already, but that particular concern was, at that stage, of
secondary importance behind placing the information beyond the reach of others.

40.	HMG was, throughout this unusual situation, trying to observe its duty to protect national
security and to avoid any misrepresentation that the Government was seeking to hide
embarrassment or stifle legitimate journalism.

41.	From a national security perspective we had two specific concerns to manage. There was the
direct damage to national security that could flow from the newspaper’s reporting, but there
was also the wider question of intended or unintended disclosure of the material to third
parties, for we were sure that The Guardian would not be able to provide
adequate assurance around its security arrangements. HMG was extremely concerned that
The Guardian had effectively advertised itself as a target for hostile groups wishing to obtain
the underlying data. 42 * * *

42.	We were also aware that there could be other parties who might already have access to the
information, and that there might be more than one copy of the information, and that these

copies could be located outside the UK. So HMG needed to try to avoid its efforts (to secure

the material held by The Guardian and prevent damaging disclosures) provoking a more

wholesale disclosure by another party.

11

43.	It is important to note that, in seeking to protect the material. HMG was carrying out its duty
to protect the public. Over and above the statutory duties of the security and intelligence
agencies, one of the first functions of Government is to protect the country and its citizens
against threats. It is this overriding public interest which informed the approach HMG took
in relation to the aim of making the material safe, above all else. We were also clear that due
to these obligations that leaving the material in jeopardy was not an option.

44. Our consideration of the options for making the material safe led us
to conclude that, so long as the newspaper showed co-operation, engagement was the best
strategy. In reaching this conclusion we were mindful of the following:

a.	Civil action to retrieve the information was an option kept open at all times, but
was not considered necessary so long as negotiation with the Guardian was
productive, and might risk provoking an irresponsible reaction.

b.	A complaint to the police was considered but, as stated above, HMG was always
mindfiil of its strong wish to avoid any misrepresentation that the Government
was seeking to hide embarrassment or stifle legitimate journalism. Had The
Guardian failed to co-operate, HMG would have reassessed our initial decision.

45.	Having decided upon our strategy, we made a confidential approach to the newspaper.
Through a series of discussions we first secured an agreement that the newspaper would not
publish a story without first approaching us through the DA Notice Committee or directly.
Having achieved this first limited goal our emphasis shifted to working to secure the
information. 46

46.	Further discussions led to an agreement with The Guardian Editor, Mr Rusbridger, that the
material should be destroyed to make it safe. We made clear to The Guardian from the outset
that we were extremely concerned by their possession of our sensitive information and that
they should not be holding it. We informed them that we had no confidence in their ability to
keep the material safe. Nor could they understand the damage that might flow from its
further compromise. We made clear that the information would be targeted by any number of
hostile actors and could cause further damage to UK counter terrorism operations.

12

47.	The Guardian appeared to accept our assessment that their continued possession of the
information was untenable. The Guardian continued to refuse to hand over the material and
would not move on this point. Therefore destruction of the material, under our supervision,
was assessed to be the best practicable option, as it immediately prevented further damage as
a result of disclosure from their cache and we achieved our objective in this respect. We had
acted in good faith, reaching a confidential agreement (now broken by The Guardian) whilst
not alerting other parties.

48.	Despite agreeing to keep HMG’s interaction with The Guardian confidential, the newspaper
unilaterally published details on 20 August 2013. The Guardian also revealed on 23 August
(in an article titled ‘Guardian partners with New York Times over Snowden GCHQ files’)
that they provided a separate copy of the material to a third party in order to get it outside of
the UK’s jurisdiction. This is obviously, from a national security perspective, of great
concern, for the reasons set out earlier in this witness statement. But it does not mean that the
decision by HMG to engage with The Guardian to encourage responsible journalism and the
police’s decision to stop the claimant are inconsistent.

49.	This witness statement sets out the urgent need, for both national security reasons and to
support the police’s criminal investigation, for the police and other agencies to disclose,
transfer, examine or otherwise interfere with the material that was seized in order to
understand its contents and take steps to mitigate the adverse consequences for the national
security of the United Kingdom.

50.	The contents of this witness statement are true to the best of my knowledge and belief,

Conclusion

Dated:

13