Statement made on behalf of:

Witness:
Statement No:
Exhibits Referred to:
Date Statement Made:

The Commissioner of Police of the
Metropolis

Caroline Goode

1

N/A

27th August 2013

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

DIVISIONAL COURT	CLAIM No: CO/1732/2013

R (on the application of)
David Miranda

Claimant

(1) The Secretary of State for the Home Department

First Defendant

(2) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis

Second Defendant

Witness:	Caroline Goode

Occupation:	Police Officer

Address:	New Scotland Yard,	London, SW1H OBG

I believe the facts stated in this witness statement are true

Signed...

iC



1. I am a Detective Superintendent in the Metropolitan Police Service (MPS) currently
attached to SOI 5, the MPS Counter-Terrorism Command.

I



DATED

Ä7.S

2. I am the Senior Investigating Officer (SIO). My role is to set the strategic direction
for the investigation, a summary of which is set out below, outlining objectives and
potential lines of enquiry and ensuring that the investigation is carried out lawfully
and expeditiously. I am responsible for all strategic and tactical decisions throughout
the investigation. My immediate line manager is the Head of Operations for SO 15
and ultimately I am answerable to the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.

3.	I am authorised to make this witness statement on behalf of the Second Defendant in
opposition to the Claimant’s application for interim relief in these proceedings. I
make this statement from my own knowledge and where matters are not within my
own knowledge, from information and documents made available to me and from
consultation with other agencies.

4.	This statement is made in order to address issues arising from the Claimant's
application for interim relief dated 21st August 2013. Evidence in support of the
substantive claim for judicial review will be served, as the Court has ordered (Order of
Beatson LJ and Kenneth Parker J dated 23rd August 2013) on the 12th September 2013.

5.	The history of these proceedings is succinctly set out in paras 3 and 4 of the Divisional
Court judgment dated 23rd August. Save where necessary, I will not repeat this here.

The Investigation

"i C.

SIGNEDÎ£^2Ætfcd

DATED

7 ¿o /3

6.	At the hearing of the interim relief application on the 22nd August 2013, the MPS
announced that based on its assessment of at least some of the material that was seized
from Mr Miranda on the 18th August 2013, it had commenced a criminal investigation,

7.	The effect of the Order made by the Court on the 23rd August, however, prevents the
MPS from fully carrying out this criminal investigation and therefore runs the risk of
the MPS failing properly to perform its statutory function to prevent and detect crime.
As the Order is presently drafted it may, arguably, prevent investigation of the section
40(1 )(a) TACT offences and would certainly prevent further access to the material for
the purposes of investigating offences contrary to the 1911 and 1989 Official Secrets
Acts.

8.	The material seized from Mr Miranda is currently under examination by SOI 5, with
the assistance of other government agencies, within the terms permitted by the Court
Order.

9.	We have examined all of these things separately and I have assessed that all of them
may be needed for use as evidence in criminal proceedings.

10.	One of the things seized was an external hard drive. This contained data that was
heavily encrypted using a form of encryption known as 'True Crypt' which renders
the material extremely difficult to access. The hard drive contains approximately 60
gigabytes of data, of which only 20 have been accessed to date. The remainder is
encrypted and officers are working with experts from other agencies to try and obtain
access to that material.



SIGNED, (....

DATED



11.	From the material that has been accessed so far, I am told that the hard drive contains
approximately 58,000 UK documents which are highly classified in nature, to the
highest levels. The disclosure of this material would be gravely injurious to UK
interests, would endanger lives, pose a significant risk to public safety and diminish
the capability to counter the threat from terrorism.

12.	Iam advised that the processing that was applied to the data that has been decrypted
from the hard drive is such that each document has to be reconstructed into a legible
format prior to it being fully assessed. So far only 75 documents have been
reconstructed since the property was initially seized. This represents only a tiny
fraction of what was seized.

13.	The MPS have been working with the appropriate partners across government, and we
have shared material with these partners.

14.	The material discloses approximately 58,000 UK documents of the highest level of
classification which we believe have been stolen from GCHQ. Disclosure of any
information contained within those documents would be gravely injurious to UK
interests, would directly put lives at risk and would pose a risk to public safety and
diminish the ability to counter terrorism. Potentially the possession of that
information may constitute offences under section 58 and 58 A of TACT 2000 and the
Official Secrets Acts.

15.	Beyond the obligation to investigate allegations of crime, the primary functions of the
Police are to protect life and prevent crime. It is already obvious that a gross breach

/

DATED

A? A V.D >3

of security has occurred. The material needs to be examined as a matter of urgency to
identify the nature of the material stolen in order to enable the MPS to mitigate the
risks posed by the theft, the unlawful possession and disclosure of this material. For
example, should the identity of individuals working for HMG be revealed their lives
and the lives of their families could be directly at risk. Similarly should details of
ongoing/historic operations and/or methodology be revealed the operation itself could
be rendered ineffective. This will consequently put the lives of the general public at
risk as we would be less able to counter the threat from terrorism. If the MPS was
able to identify what identities and information are contained within the material we
would be able to mitigate the risk posed to those individuals, those operations and the
general public at large by putting appropriate measures in place.

16.	It is also necessary to urgently examine the material in order to conduct an effective
and expeditious investigation. For example, to identify others involved in the criminal
conspiracy in time to prevent further offences and/or the destruction of evidence. It is
not sufficient merely to detain the material and prevent its non-disclosure or return to
mitigate the risk to the lives of those who may be identified by the data. It is likely
that the MPS is investigating a conspiracy with a global dimension. It is necessary to
ascertain if this stolen, classified material has been disseminated to others in order to
prevent further disclosure which would prove valuable to terrorists, thereby preventing
further offences and protecting public safety. Even if it transpires that no one else was
involved it is necessary to prevent evidence being destroyed/further disseminated. 17

17.	Should the Court order the MPS to stop examining the material, I strongly believe that
lives will be put at risk. As stated earlier the material has been shared with partner
agencies. It is necessary that we continue to share this material as they are assisting

DATED

2:7 ■ x ¿ci3

the MPS to access the data, interpret the threat posed by those documents and take
steps to mitigate the risk. Should the court order that the MPS is no longer allowed to
share the data, the MPS would be severely hindered in their efforts to access the
material as the expertise of other partners is pivotal to those efforts.

18.	All of the downloaded data may form part of criminal proceedings and as such will be
detained by police under schedule 7 of TACT, for as long as is necessary.

19.	There is an urgent need for the MPS to inspect, copy, disclose, examine, transfer or
otherwise interfere with the material that was seized from Mr Miranda on the 18th
August 2013 for the purposes of criminal investigations into offences relating to
section 40(1 )(a) TACT and offences under the Official Secrets Act.

Conclusion

DATED