SCCRTT//FGI GOR//REI TO USA. tSAf. NATO

AOI

(U) Pakistan After the UBL Raid: Status of U.S. Relations and Internal Strife

Written on 20 June 2011:

(SECRET//REL TO USA, ISAF, NATO) Executive Summary:

•	Pakistan continues to suffer from the destabilizing affects of civil unrest and international criticism in the
wake of the 2 May Bin Laden raid.

•	In addition to strained U.S. relations, Pakistan is experiencing a strong backlash from extremist
organizations who feel the Government of Pakistan is weak and complicit with Western Powers.

(SECRET//REL TO USA, ISAF, NATO)

After 11 September 2001, U.S. relations
with Pakistan became critical to enabling
U.S. and CF operations in Afghanistan.

Despite a mutual agreement to
prosecute a War on Terror centered on
al-Qaida and the Taliban, tensions
between the two countries have ebbed
and flowed, primarily over Pakistan's
tacit, and sometimes active, support to
extremist organizations, including the
Taliban. While Pakistan has commonly
voiced discontent with CF drone strikes
along the AFG-PAK border; the 2 May
raid into Abottabad, Pakistan against
Usama Bin Laden has greatly strained
U.S. - Pakistan relations. The raid
against Bin Laden led to international
criticism of Pakistan's military
involvement in counterinsurgency
operations, followed by accusations of
the Inter-Service Intelligence (ISI) Agency
providing intelligence that aids militant groups' ability to maintain influence in Afghanistan. As a result of Pakistan's
inaction and suspected affiliations, the U.S. passed a bill that limits aid to Pakistan. The U.S. normally provides annual
military funding to Pakistan in order to strengthen their counterterrorism campaign. However, U.S. officials believe
Pakistan's government has used this monetary aid to improve their defense against India by advancing their nuclear
capabilities rather than increasing their counterterrorism efforts. In mid June, legislation was approved by the House
Appropriations Committee for this year's defense budget, stipulating that 75 percent of the $1.1 billion in U.S. aid will be
withheld until Pakistan reports to the U.S. Congress on how the monetary aid is to be used. Following international and
domestic criticism of Pakistan military's counterterrorism efforts, General Kayani, the Pakistan Army Chief, cut the
number of U.S. troops stationed in Pakistan and halted U.S. training programs for Pakistani soldiers. Furthermore, in
early June, General Kayani reiterated a common complaint by Pakistan, telling U.S. commanders that drone strikes in the
tribal areas near the AFG-PAK border were not acceptable under any circumstances.

(SECRET//REL TO USA, ISAF, NATO) In addition to strained U.S. relations, Pakistan is experiencing a strong backlash
from extremist organizations who feel the Government of Pakistan is weak and complicit with Western Powers. As a
result, persistent attacks throughout Pakistan have begun to raise suspicion as to whether the Pakistan military has
become complacent or incapable of conducting effective counterterrorism operations. Attacks by Tehrik-e Taliban
Pakistan (TTP) and other groups that seek to conduct operations against the Government of Pakistan and the U.S. in
retaliation for the killing of Bin Laden, have been on the rise. On 22 May, approximately 10 to 15 militants infiltrated the

Page 5 of 22

S£CRET//fGI G8R//REL TO USA. tSAf. NATO

2011