The Mathematics Community

and the NSA

POST-PUBLICATION EDITOR'S NOTE: This article is a part of the ongoing series "Mathematicians
Discuss the Snowden Revelations". At the time of the writing of this piece Michael Wertheimer was the
Director of Research at the NSA; he recently retired from that position.

He can be reached at nsapao@nsa.gov.

This is the latest installment in the Notices discus-
sion of the National Security Agency (NSA). Previ-
ous Notices pieces on this topic are:

“AMS Should Sever Ties with the NSA” (Letter
to the Editor), by Alexander Beilinson (December
2013); “Dear NSA: Long-Term Security Depends
on Freedom”, by Stefan Forcey (January 2014);
“The NSA Backdoor to NIST”, by Thomas C. Hales
(February 2014); “The NSA: A Betrayal of Trust”, by
Keith Devlin (June/July 2014); “The Mathematical
Community and the National Security Agency”, by
Andrew odlyzko (June/July 2014); “NSA and the
Snowden Issues”, by Richard George (August 2014);
“The Danger of Success”, by William Binney (Sep-
tember 2014); “Opposing an NSA Boycott” (Letter
to the Editor), by Roger Schlafly (November 2014).

See also the Letters to the Editor in this issue.

Unsolicited submissions on this topic are wel-
come. Inquiries and submissions may be sent to
noti ces-snowden@ams. org. Articles of 800 words
or less are preferred. Those of 400 words or less
can be considered as Letters to the Editor and
should be sent to notices-1etters@ams.org.

— Allyn Jackson
Notices Deputy Editor
axj@ams.org

Encryption and
the NSA Role in
International Standards

Michael Wertheimer

Michael Wertheimer is Director of Research at the National
Security Agency. His email address is mawe rth@nsa .gov.

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/noti1213

Over the past several months a discussion about
the role of mathematics, mathematicians, and
the activities of the National Security Agency has
been hosted on the pages of the Notices. As an
NSA mathematician I would like to provide some
context to what has been reported in the press and
share with the American Mathematical Society im-
portant facts and information. In particular I would
like to address two hot-button issues shaping this
conversation: “weakening” Internet encryption and
impacts of data on privacy.

The US National Institute for Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST), the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI), the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), and the International Standards Orga-
nization (ISO) are the four main bodies with which
the NSA participates in developing standards for
cryptography. NSA has worked with each of these
for over twenty-five years. We value and are com-
mitted to the important work of these groups in
producing secure cryptographic standards that
protect global communications. NSA has a long and
documented record of providing security enhance-
ments to openly published international standards.
However, recently our work has been questioned
in several standards that are elliptic curve based,
the most significant of which is an NIST-proposed
random number generator that I discuss below.

NSA mathematicians remain steadfast in ad-
vocating secure international standards. Nev-
ertheless, we are mindful that there has been
considerable discussion regarding NIST publi-
cation SP 800-90A. This publication is entitled
“Recommendation for Random Number Genera-
tion Using Deterministic Random Bit Generators”
and contains specifications for four pseudoran-
dom number generations for use in cryptographic
applications. One of these describes a particular
random number generator associated with NSA:
the Dual Elliptic Curve Deterministic Random Bit
Generator (Dual_EC_DRBG). The discussion centers
on NSA’s role in the design and advocacy for this
algorithm despite a mathematical demonstration
of the potential for a trapdoor.

February 2015

Notices of the AMS

165

A trapdoor, simply put, is information that al-
lows the inverse of a seemingly one-way function
to be computed easily. In other words, compute x
from f(x). In cryptographic applications, functions
f are specifically designed to make the x to f(x)
computation very fast but the inverse computation
intractable (hence, the term one-way). If an attacker
knows “secret” information about f that allows
an inverse to be calculated, the attacker might
be able to decrypt messages or, in the case of the
Dual_EC_DRBG, predict future outputs.

During the development of the ANSI standard
based on the NIST publication, members of X9F1
(the ANSI-approved working group responsible for
cryptographic tools) raised concerns about the po-
tential that elliptic curve points used as parameters
for the Dual_EC_DRBG could harbor a trapdoor
secret known only to, and exploitable only by, the
person who generated the points. As a result, the
X9F1 committee expanded the standard to include
verifiable random point generation. Since the NSA
was using the algorithm at the time and had gen-
erated elliptic curve points for protecting Depart-
ment of Defense users, the NSA-generated points
were included in the standard. In other words,
any implementation that used the NSA-generated
points would be deemed compliant. Shortly there-
after, NIST negotiated with ANSI to use the ANSI
Random Number Generation Standard as the basis
for an NIST Random Number Generation Standard.
ANSI also approved submitting a version of this
standard to the ISO.

In 2007 several Microsoft researchers, includ-
ing Microsoft’s representative to the ANSI X9F1
committee that created the ANSI version of the
standard, raised concerns in a talk at a crypto-
graphic conference about the trapdoor potential
in the Dual_EC_DRBG. These concerns were picked
up by the media and widely disseminated. NIST
and ANSI reviewed this information and elected to
retain both the verifiable point generation scheme
and the NSA-generated points.

In 2013 the same concerns were again raised
and promulgated by the media. This time NSA’s
actions were portrayed as a subversion of stan-
dards. However, the facts remain:

•	The Dual_EC_DRBG was one of four
random number generators in the NIST
standard; it is neither required nor the
default.

•	The NSA-generated elliptic curve
points were necessary for accreditation
of the Dual_EC_DRBG but only had to
be implemented for actual use in cer-
tain DoD applications.

•	The trapdoor concerns were openly
studied by ANSI X9F1, NIST, and by the
public in 2007.

With hindsight, NSA should have ceased sup-
porting the dual EC_DRBG algorithm immediately
after security researchers discovered the potential
for a trapdoor. In truth, I can think of no better
way to describe our failure to drop support for the
Dual_EC_DRBG algorithm as anything other than
regrettable. The costs to the Defense Department
to deploy a new algorithm were not an adequate
reason to sustain our support for a questionable
algorithm. Indeed, we support NIST’s April 2014
decision to remove the algorithm. Furthermore, we
realize that our advocacy for the DUAL_EC_DRBG
casts suspicion on the broader body of work NSA
has done to promote secure standards. Indeed,
some colleagues have extrapolated this single ac-
tion to allege that NSA has a broader agenda to
“undermine Internet encryption.” A fair reading
of our track record speaks otherwise. Neverthe-
less, we understand that NSA must be much more
transparent in its standards work and act accord-
ing to that transparency. That effort can begin with
the AMS now.

NSA strongly endorses the NIST outline for
cryptographic standards development, which
can be found at csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/
crypto-review/process.html. One significant,
and correct, change is that all NSA comments will
be in writing and published for review. In other
words, we will be open and transparent about our
cryptographic contributions to standards. In ad-
dition, we will publish algorithms before they are
considered for standardization to allow more time
for public scrutiny (as we did recently with the
new SIMON and SPECK algorithms, eprint.iacr.
org/2013/404.pdf). With these measures in place,
even those not disposed to trust NSA’s motives can
determine for themselves the appropriateness of
our submissions, and we will continue to advocate
for better security in open-source software, such as
Security Enhancements for Linux and Security En-
hancements for Android (selinuxproject.org).

We hope this open affirmation and our adher-
ence to it will chart a course that all mathemati-
cians will agree is appropriate and correct.

Data and Privacy

NSA mathematicians carry on a long and storied
tradition of making and breaking codes and ci-
phers. Perhaps most celebrated are feats that our
forebearers, American and Allied, made in break-
ing German and Japanese ciphers in World War
II. Ironically, less than 5 percent of the encrypted
material collected during that war was successfully
decrypted, and of that amount only a scant fraction
contributed to any sort of measurable action. Such
is the nature of intelligence.

Today’s communications environment makes
5 percent appear staggeringly large. The simple
act of using a particular encryption algorithm no
longer identifies the sender or receiver (as the

166

Notices of the AMS

Volume 62, Number 2

ENIGMA cipher did in World War II); the variety
of protocols, products, and services for secure
communications numbers in the thousands; and
the ease and frequency of changing identifiable
features is unprecedented. To achieve our foreign
intelligence mission lawfully and effectively, NSA
mathematicians lead efforts that determine how
we “filter,” “select,” and “process” data while
continuously verifying that our processes and pro-
cedures adhere to all legal and policy regulations.

Filtering algorithms decide what material is
defeated, i.e., neither collected nor stored for
analysis. Using aggregate numbers, of the exceed-
ingly small proportion of the world’s foreign com-
munications we access, NSA algorithms filter out
approximately 99.998 percent of the data it sees.
The importance of these algorithms cannot be
overstated: they form the bulwark of the legal and
privacy protections in executing our mission. After
the filtering process, surviving data must meet
exacting criteria to be “selected” for subsequent
processing and analysis. NSA mathematicians are
at the forefront in designing the methods by which
the selection criteria are expressed. The precision
and accuracy of these methods are constantly
improving and with those improvements come
increased privacy protections.

I am reminded of an event shortly after the 9/11
attacks that may help to impress the importance
of getting filtering and selection “right.” Soon after
allied operations launched in Afghanistan we came
into possession of laptops left behind by retreat-
ing Taliban combatants. In one case we were able
to retrieve an email listing in the customary to/
from/subject/date format. There was only one
English language email listed. The “to” and “from”
addresses were nondescript (later confirmed to
be combatants) and the subject line read: CON-
SOLIDATE YOUR DEBT. It is surely the case that
the sender and receiver attempted to avoid allied
collection of this operational message by trigger-
ing presumed “spam” filters. Indeed, this is exactly
how intelligence and counterintelligence work: an
escalating series of moves to discover and avoid
discovery of information.

Adapting our filters and selectors to stay rel-
evant while always operating within our legal and
policy framework can never be perfect—but it is
nearly so. Indeed, in a much-publicized account
of 2,776 deviations from the rule set in 2012, a
full 75 percent of these incidents occurred when
an individual roamed from foreign soil to US soil
and we failed to catch the fact in real time. The
remaining 25 percent, about 700 in total, were
human error (e.g., typing mistakes). Put into
perspective, the average analyst at NSA makes a
compliance mistake once every ten years.

The collection and analysis of data that lie be-
tween filtering (what we know we do not want) and
selection (what we know we do want) is governed

by a complex set of laws, policies, and implement-
ing rules. This type of data, lawfully obtained and
properly evaluated, helps us to avoid surprise. It
is used to discover new threats, refine both our
filters and selectors, and ultimately create a rising
tide that lifts our intelligence insights and privacy
protections. Mathematicians are leading the way
to design and implement the algorithms that cre-
ate this rising tide. Here we share many common
interests with industry: e.g., big data analytics,
cloud computing, machine learning, and advanced
search. So-called metadata (intelligence informa-
tion that can be ascertained without examining
the actual content of a communication) plays a big
role here, as our governing rules generally do not
permit deep inspection when the aperture into our
data set widens. Getting this right is paramount:
the average NSA mathematician takes fourteen
courses each year to be up-to-date on the proce-
dures that govern these activities.

Some Parting Thoughts

I fondly recall the opportunity NSA gave me early in
my career to return to the University of Pennsylva-
nia and complete my PhD. During those formative
years I had many opportunities to present results
at AMS conferences, and I remember the warm
embrace of colleagues who encouraged and sup-
ported my studies. I felt then, and I feel now, a con-
nection to the mathematics community that goes
beyond scholarship. That is why NSA Research is
a major provider of grants for pure mathematical
research, a participant in the National Physical
Sciences Consortium, a sponsor of local high
school teams for the American Regions Mathemat-
ics League, and sponsors of both undergraduate
and graduate summer programs. Our research
mathematicians serve on editorial boards, publish
papers, teach at universities, and contribute time
and energy to the AMS.

More broadly, NSA mathematicians are also
fighters in the war on international terrorism,
weapons of mass destruction proliferation, narcot-
ics trafficking, and piracy. In fact, the overwhelm-
ing bulk of what we do is universally acknowledged
as proper, measured, and important. We do so
quietly and honorably.

It is my sincerest hope that the AMS will always
see NSA mathematicians as an important part of its
membership. I further hope that dialogue on im-
portant issues will always be respectful, informed,
and focused on inclusivity.

February 2015

Notices of the AMS

167