NATO SECRET

4.	In RC(SW), Sangin remains one of the most volatile districts in Helmand Province,
although due to the poppy harvest and associated tax collection, kinetic activity decreased
during the past few weeks. ISAF assesses that the fighting season in Sangin will
commence in earnest after the poppy harvest. Reporting indicates that INS continue to
prepare for summer operations, to include an extensive intimidation campaign, executing
attacks against off duty ANSF members and their families and use of out of area fighter
reinforcements. Sangin District will likely continue to be one of the most contested areas
for the insurgency this summer. However, ISAF assesses that GIRoA’s improvements in
Helmand Province are gaining support among local nationals, even as INS commanders
continue to reinforce the area with fighters and increase kinetic activity during the summer.

5.	In RC(S), Operation MOUNTAIN JAGUAR began during this reporting period. It aims
to disrupt INS preparation for the summer offensive and achieved effects across the
region. Notably, INS finance and logistic networks were significantly affected by two air
assault operations in the troublesome Zharay and Maiwand Districts. The air assaults,
executed by Task Force SPARTAN (10th MTN DIV), resulted in the seizure and destruction
of 7 Vz tons of hashish, 150 kg of homemade explosives, 120 kg of opium and a large
quantity of lED-making materials. Intelligence sources indicate that key INS leadership
has taken notice of the operation and expressed concern about its effects.

6.	Governance. On 30 Apr 11, municipal elections were held in Laskar Gah, the capital
of Helmand in RC(SW). The ANSF took the lead, planning and executing a highly
effective plan that saw the ANP running security and the Operational Coordination Centre -
Province (OCC-P) delivering coherent command and control for the ANA and ANP. ISAF
assisted by conducting an initial search of facilities and providing a quick reaction force.

1,900 Elders and notables from every mosque elected a 25 member municipal body
(including two women) which will improve the resolution of disputes and help bridge the
communication gap between the mayor and the people. Although ANSF and ISAF made
headway by removing the INS from Laskar Gah, certain key malign local (non INS) actors* 2
remain in place. The abuse of their position presents the most insidious threat to further
improving governance.

7.	Development. The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (MCIT)
is collecting the biggest portion of the revenues for the AFG government, approximately
US$ 129 million for 2010 and an estimated US$ 150 million this year. Approximately 85%
of AFG population currently has access to telecommunication services. The
telecommunications network is planned to expand to the remaining 15% of the population,
which include some of the country’s less secure areas such as Zabul and Helmand
provinces, by the end of 2011. To date, a total of US$ 1.5 billion has been invested in the
AFG telecommunications sector, which is the largest foreign direct investment in any
sector.

Current Issues

8.	Insurgency Largely Unaffected by Osama bin Laden’s (OBL) Death. A number of
factors since 2001 have strained the relationship between Al Qaida and the Taliban,
including conflicting strategic visions, isolation of organizational leadership, geographic
separation, and Al Qaida’s reduced capacity to provide financial and operational support

2 Examples: Senator Sher Mohammad Akhundzada, related to President Karzai through marriage. He is the
single most powerful powerbroker in Helmand and is known to be involved in narcotics activities. Abdul
Rahman Jan is a key powerbroker in Marjeh and former Chief of Police of Helmand. and is also involved in
narcotics.

2

NATO SECRET