NATO SECRET

following counter terrorism strikes in PAK’s tribal areas. These tensions as well as the
Taliban’s ability to draw upon alternate financial sources of support will ensure that OBL’s
death will have a limited impact on the Taliban’s ability to sustain their campaign.
Furthermore, ISAF sources estimate that only about 100 or so Al Qaida militants currently
operate in AFG, mostly in the remote mountainous areas along the northeastern frontier
with PAK. Areas such as Nangahar, Nuristan, and Kunar retain Al Qaida connections
through the Haqqani Network (HQN), which remains a key enabler for Al Qaida to operate
in AFG.

9.	The Taliban’s relationship with Al Qaida has not been a key factor influencing the
senior leadership’s opposition to a political settlement with the AFG government and their
demand for the withdrawal of foreign troops. OBL’s death offers an opportunity for the
Taliban to highlight that they were not harboring OBL, in an attempt to detach themselves
from international terrorism and increase their political and moral legitimacy.

10.	Following the successful operation against OBL, an increase in operational security
(OPSEC) in the short term might limit the operational communications of Al Qaida and
Taliban. Due to the decentralized nature of the AFG insurgency, this potential disconnect
with their leadership is unlikely to translate into a reduced operational tempo.

11.	Private Security Companies (PSC). After signing the PSC bridging strategy, ISAF
continues to support the AFG Government with the implementation of the plan. To
accelerate the AFG Public Protection Force (APPF) growth and to minimize the chances of
further disruptions to new and ongoing projects, ISAF is assisting the Ministry of Interior
(MOI) in developing APPF training procedures and directives to relicense legal PSCs,
register vehicles and weapons, issue visa and implement the bridging tashkii* 3 procedures.
The unresolved issue on APPF ownership within the AFG government remains a concern.

OPERATION UNIFIED PROTECTOR (OUP)

Overview

12.	Security. The situation on the ground remains strategically unchanged over the past
week. The arms embargo and no fly zone remain effective, and the air campaign
continues to degrade the regime’s capability to threaten the civilian population and
population centers through the use of kinetic strikes against deliberate and dynamic
targets, along with non-kinetic methods.

13.	In the East. There are no significant strategic changes in the disposition of pro-
Gadhafi and opposition forces along the coastal strip from Brega to Ajdabiyah. Regime
and opposition forces continue to conduct tactical probes likely aimed at determining the
disposition of each other’s forces in this area.

14.	Misurata. The Misurata port re-opened on 04 May after the sea mine threat from 29
Apr was minimised. Despite continued hit and run indirect attacks against Misurata by
regime forces, 4 ships entered the port in the past 7 days bringing urgently needed
supplies and enabling more evacuations. During 05 to 07 May, pro-Gadhafi helicopters
conducted night operations at the port, and reportedly dropped landmines on port facilities,
hitting the piers. Mines were also thought to have been fired from artillery, possible BM-
21, over the city. Mines that fell in the water are not considered a threat to shipping.
Similarly, on 06-07 May, a large fuel storage tank was set on fire at the Steel and Iron

3	Afghan "tashkii" refers to table of equipment.

3

NATO SECRET