DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

(U) GOOOOAAAALLLL!!! -- World Cup Report from SUSLAG
FROM: Special US Liaison Activity Germany
Unknown

Run Date: 08/25/2006

(SIIS\) NSAers pitch in to help maintain security during the World Cup tournament.

(U) A month of displaying good German hospitality and World Cup fever culminated with Italy winning
the soccer championship on penalty kicks, 5-3 over France. As millions of people streamed into Germany
from all points on the globe, a frenzied environment existed from 9 June, when Germany vs. Costa Rica
kicked off the first game in Munich, through the final game on 9 July.

(U) Argentina (in blue and white) goes for the goal against Mexico

(U) After an opening game 4-2 victory for the host nation, the entire country took on a level of
intoxication usually only brought on by MaGes (liters) of German beer. Alas, the US team managed only a
tie and two losses, sending them home early in the tournament.

(S//SI) BND-2, the SIGINT arm of the German Foreign Intelligence Service, went on 24/7 manning in
support of the games. SUSLAG also provided extended-hours support, ensuring the office was manned
prior to and during most matches. Although relatively quiet and peaceful with no terrorist events during
the games, the watchful resources of NSA, BND, as well as SISECT (SIGINT Seniors Europe CT)
nations and other partners remained vigilant.

(S//SI) NSA also provided TDY support to Berlin Station prior to and during the entire tournament. This
not only assisted the Station in its duties to ensure the safety of US personnel in Germany and as the focal
point for the US Intelligence Community in support to the German Government during the games, but
also ended up providing outstanding SIGINT support for other ongoing Station activities.

(U) The host country, Germany, managed to take third place overall, with a strong 3-1 victory over
Portugal. Soccer fans will now wait for the run up to the next World Cup, hosted by South Africa in 2010.

(U//FOUO) This article is reprinted from the Foreign Affairs Digest, July/August edition.

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles
may not be republished or
reposted outside NSANet
without the consent of S0121
(DL sid_comms)."