

mouuiui o.

When those former network admins arc hired and we put them to work in TAO. there's a
mental shift that takes place as they switch from playing defense to offense, but they
have the knowledge they need. There arc some really great R&T analysts who came here
with S2 and SIGDEV backgrounds, but those with network admin experience have the
easiest transition.

4. (U) Aren't the skills needed for CNE highly marketable on the "outside"? If so,
is it hard for the government to attract and retain those workers?*

(S//SI//REL) There arc tw o sides to it. On the positive side, the job is amazing and
awesome! We do things that you can't do anywhere else in the country... at least not
legally. We arc gainfully employed to hack computers owned by al-Qa'ida! I was even
involved in the operation against UBL [Usama bin Laden| — how' many people can say
they were involved in something like that? We get great job satisfaction. CNE is
enabling kinetic [i.e.. bullets, bombs, missiles, ctc.j operations against bad people on a
regular basis. We also get immediate feedback, which means instant gratification, shared
by everyone on the team. Also, the people we work with arc good. As I mentioned, we
feel as though we arc among brcthcrcn. All of these factors make people reluctant to
leave TAO.

(U//FOUO) Now on the other hand, there are lures to leave. It's not the highest-paying
job. especially for developers who can write exploits that arc worth a lot of money on
the open market. Even locally — within just the Washington. DC. metro area — people
could probably make more money. Another factor is that the people who arc close to
active operations — in R&T and the ROC. for example — arc civilians or military, not
contractors. That is because the jobs they do arc considered an inherently governmental
function, not something that is appropriate for contract work. Many young people have
more of a short-term mentality than the older generations, and they don't necessarily
w ant or expect to stay in the same job w ith the same employer for an extended period of
time.

(U) ...Do TAO "hackers" feel uneasy about the fact that they work for the
government? Do they feel restricted?

(U//FOUO) I think some people do chafe a bit at government restrictions, but overall I
don't think it is a big problem. We train people to make things happen and to not let
bureaucracy stand in the way. If necessary, we'll get management involved, and they arc
very supportive of us. We arc a very high-priority mission and management really looks
out for us and makes problems go away. They arc willing to convey a sense of urgency
to all involved that we need to ’get it done."

(U) ...Do you have the workers in tee shirts on one side and managers in suits on the
other? Is there a big cultural divide?

(U) Actually. I think the managers get absorbed into the "hacker" culture! I remember
we had a new manager join us and he wore a suit for a w hile, but eventually he started
dressing more casually like the rest of us.

(UIIFOUO)

(seated) among the "hretheren' at a hackers convention.

-•___1--_r—____f al_ i-a--

r /¥T\ V-..

-fit. •_«. 1VL.A--

«L _