 [In the Road Again: SID Tean1 1visits Guern'iamF

FROM: 

Assistant Deputy Director for Analysis 15; Production [52}
Run Date: DEIDIIEDDB

After staying around headquarters for the last quarter, it Twas time for
me to get out and about into the extended enterprise! In earlyjanuary I joined a
SID team on a trip to Germany to gain insight into the operations there and to

lofd

update the Europe workforce on Agency; SID and S2 initiatives. Our team
consisted of:

SID Chief of Staff;

SID Executive Assistant;

Deputy Technical Director;

DAP Executive Assistant; and

. and Senior Intelligence Authority}.

 
   
 

We visited elements of the European Command headquarters
and Europe near Stuttgart; Germany; the European Security
Center in Darmstadt; and the European Technical Cen 
Wieshaden. [See a W.) Chief; 
accompanied us throughout.

Stuttgart: European Conunand HQ and NSAJC SS Europe 

We arrived in Stuttgart on Monday; January To stave off the jet lag;
we walked around downtown Stuttgart until meeting up with a group 
folks for a dinner of good German food.

Cm Tuesday morning we were treated to several on EUCCM and
NCEUR and met with the EUCCM 13 [Director of Operations}; Rear
Admiralmnd EUCCM 12 [Director ofIntelligence}; Brigadier General

coming away with a better understanding of their perspectives. We used the
opportunity to explain to them how NSA's distributed analytic enterprise can he
engaged in efforts to meet their information needs.

Cur session with the 3 was very positive and he appreciated the value

ofanalysis. Rear Admiral?feels strongly that intelligence sharing needs a
systematic approach to enable transparency. He recognizes that we are integrated
and connected and therefore can't afford to operate independently.

We next met with the 12. so -The ch {sucom's Joint Analysis
Center in Molesworth; England} joined us virtually; giving us the chance to hear
their concerns. We discussed the Mission Build-out; governance; resource
challenges and mission management of a distributed enterprise. A key area of
concern is "less commonly taught languages" and what we're doing to meet that
challenge. We made sure they knew that is at the forefront by leveraging
language resources in Utah [see a related message}. the National Virtual
Translation Center and our 2nd party partners. We intend to leverage
those opportunities enterprise-wide. We also discussed the new "lane structure"
and the Strategic Mission List. EG -is interested in results from an all-source
perspective and asked that we keep our capabilities relevant to EUCCM. He was
glad we were there and hoped we would gain an appreciation of their ops during
the rest of our visit.

We also held a town meeting with NCEUR personnel to cover current
events relating to resources and the structure of the Agency; as well as strategic
planning initiatives. Major points included:

I Future trends and challenges in A St 
I- Future roles for the extended enterprise in A St 

Llan

I Changes in IT infrastructure due to new tools and techniques
I- SE Assessment Cell
1' Senior Intelligence Authority issues

We need to ensure we take advantage oftheir forward presence. As a
forward-deployed function they are empowered leaders and strategists. We need to
keep doing forward what's hest done forward! Following a husy and productive day;
we went to a great little restaurant "Waldheim" - or "home in the woods."
Patch Barracks; near Stuttgart: home to EUCDM HQ and NCEUR.
Dannstadt: The European Security Center 
Cm the morning of Wednesday; 11 january; we traveled to Darmstadt
visit with the 66th MI Group 'ty Center. CCL
66th MI GP Commander; LTC ESC Director-
ESC Deputy Director; and their energetic team provided an outstanding

overview oftheir organizational structure; operations; successes and challenges.

   
 

  

The is a functioning part ofthe enterprise. They've made great
strides in their analytic expertise. The analytic support received from SIDESEISSG
is great and continues to expand. S2 elements; in particular and g:
were lauded for their outstanding support. The as an AtStP-forward function
gives them many advantages. Their state-of-the-art operations area allows them
quick; deployahle; and operational partnerships. Weekly VTCs with virtual teams
for targets relevant to the EUCCM theater help them maintain perspective.

Wieshaden: The European Tachnic a] Center 

We drove on to Wieshaden that evening. We met up with folks from the
ETC for dinner [at a great restaurant - The Winkger (yes; the Vikingerll to get to
know a hit about each other and to help set the stage for Thursday's visit. Through
a series we gained a good perspective on the critical role ETC plays in
the enterprise and gained an appreciation ofhow we can work together to heneflt
the enterprise. We also held a town meeting with the ETC team where I reiterated
what a greatjoh they are doing with customers; partners; and Third Party
relationships.

Impressions 

Throughout the visit; the knowledge and insights our personnel gain by
heing "forward" in the customer's domain was evident. Even more impressive was
how their knowledge of other operations centers; such as NSA Hi}, the 
Centers; mission ground stations -just to name a few - was heing leveraged to
respond to the needs of the EUCCM customer. By knowing how the 
system operates; and knowing how to insert requirements; our personnel are ahle
to make signi?cant contrihutions to the enterprise. In addition; they
grow professionally and personally - by seeing our Agency from a different
perspective; gaining a hroader understanding ofhow we're viewed; and by
experiencing life in a different culture.

For more details about MCEDR type "go nceur" on your weh hrowser!

Sofa

4of4

