(S//SI//REL) Finding Nuggets -- Quickly — in a Heap of Voice Collection, From Mexico to

Afghanistan

FROM: (U//FOUO)^^^^^^|

Senior Technical Development Program — Class of 2010, and Intelligence Analysis Technical
Director, NS A Texas
Run Date: 05/25/2011

(U//FOUO) Recendy I had a rare life-changing instance where the highly unexpected occurred, a
so-called "black swan" event.* What was this event? It was my exchange with the Human
Language Technology (HLT) Division in the Research Directorate and with many other HLT
believers.

(U) Before submerging into HLT as my Senior Technical Development Program goal, I had no clue
what HLT was. If asked, I would have defined the Human Language Technology concept as the
ability of linguists to use the available technology to search for reportable intelligence from voice
traffic. Speaker identification was no more than "yes, that's the guy!", I imagined. Language
identification was even simpler: Spanish, not Spanish; and keyword search, well... what's a
keyword?

(S//SI//REL) My definition of HLT has changed through the years. The Human part involves a lot
more than simply understanding the target language, given the need for a language analyst to know
customers' requirements, collection techniques, global networks composition, and legal rules. As
for the Language, it is no longer enough to know what was said in speech or conveyed in writing.
In order to determine intent, the analyst must know how things were said, in what tone and accent,
the mood of the person, vocabulary usage, religious and political beliefs, nationality, type of device
used, communication patterns, associations, and the location of the speakers to the nearest cell
tower! Then there is Technology, which has given analysts a more comprehensive view of their
target space and has also made that target space larger and impossible to navigate "a cappella."

(S//SI//REL) To successfully track those elusive and always-mobile targets, we must find them,
regardless of which communication method they happen to be using. What we do not know is how
many wrong-doers we might have overlooked or how many illegal operations we might have failed
to uncover because of the volumes of data that we were not able to scan. That's where Human
Language Technology can help: it can find the exact traffic of interest within a mass of
collection.

(S//SI//REL) To sell the technology to those who would benefit from it, we need to convince a
veteran linguist that a computer will actually find a target of interest using a statistically generated
voice model, even if the phone number has changed! It's not an easy sell. We must also change the
way we process and analyze collected intelligence. However, the HLT organization (R67, formerly
R64) is helping analysts embrace the HLT concept and is enabling them to see further into their
overstuffed queues.

(S//SI//REL) Thanks to the support of the SCS Director, researchers from R64 accompanied by this
lone S2 language analyst, delivered HLT analytics to F6 sites in the Americas; the immediate
success of the first HTL-Labs system was possible not just because the technology was mature
enough, but because visionary leaders —with DIRNSA at the top- and open-minded field analysts
have accepted both the virtues and the flaws of this revolutionary technology.

(TS//SI//REL) SCS Spanish Language Voice Analysts have learned to exploit the advantages of
speech-to-text keyword search, and have quickly integrated speaker, gender, and language
recognition into their workflows. NSA-Texas analysts who were part of the initial testing and

validation of HLT analytics helped verified their utility, and the successes multiplied. From finding
tunnels in Tijuana, identifying bomb threats in the streets of Mexico City, or shedding light on the
shooting of US Customs officials in Potosi, Mexico, the technology did what it advertised: it
accelerated the process of finding relevant intelligence when time was of the essence. (See
related article.)

(S//REL) I did not expect to find myself across the world explaining the technology to military
leaders and/or introducing translators at the Afghanistan Remote Operations Cryptologic Center
(AROCC) to research and analysis skills, but thei^gain^lacl^wan events are unpredictable.
DIRNSA appointed one of his military Fellows,below with author in
Kandahar) --a dedicated an exemplary Army officer- to lead the deployment of HLT analytics to
Afghanistan. From Kandahar to Kabul, we have traveled the country explaining NS A leaders'
vision and introducing SIGINT teams to what HLT analytics can do today and to what is still
needed to make this technology a game-changing success.

(S//REL) While the challenges of the Afghanistan language mission are not insurmountable, it will
take many months for HLT analytics to reach the same level of performance as the Spanish systems
deployed to SCS. The AROCC and SCS missions are different but the underlying problem is the
same: not enough talented language analysts to process everything we collect. With a commitment
from R to improve the speech-to-text functionality, with support from S, T, NSA Georgia, the
AROCC and NCR leadership, and more importantly, with the keen interest of every language
analyst in theater to learn about and use HLT tools, in time this technology will likely redefine the
way speech is processed in the SIGINT missions of Afghanistan.

(U//FOUO) Analytic modernization is as much about technology as it is about people;
understanding the needs of analysts and shaping technology to enable them to succeed is perhaps
the most satisfying result, whether prosecuting narcotics traffickers in Mexico or Taliban leaders in
Afghanistan.

(U) Notes:

* (U) The term comes from Nassim Nicholas Taleb's 2007 book "The Black Swan."