(U) DEA - The "Other" Warfighter



DEH Account Manager (5112)
Run Date: Ddf20f2004

(UHFCIUD) When you think about our top national security threats, chances are that terrorism and
military conflict come quickly to mind - and for good reason. But how many of us list illegal
narcotics among the top threats to our society? CIur national leadership rec ognised the seriousness
this problem poses and declared a war on drugs two decades ago. This "war" has all the risks,
excitement, and dangers of conventional warfare, and the stakes are equally high.

We are all aware that the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is leading our
nation's counternarcotics (CN) efforts. But many are not aware that from the start NSAhas been at
the forefront of Intelligence Com mtmity (IC) support to this seemingly unc onyentional DOD
mission. The noyel collection and analysis techniques NSr??i deyelop ed and refined against these
criminalhard targets have not only resulted in major successes in the war on drugs, they have
also pr oyen invaluable to other critical SICINT missions, particularly counterterrorism, sometimes
blurring the lines between the two missions.

(C) DEA has close relationships with foreign goyernm ent counterparts and yetted foreign parmers.
The results of this team approach regularly make the headlines in the form of major drug busts and
arrests. Less known is the critical supporting role that continues to play in key DEA operations
to disrupt the ?ow of narcotics to our country and thwart other, related crimes. DEA, howeyer,

recognises the unique access and sole source information NEH provides and coordinates major
cases with the SEFHCN Product Line.

(C) As a result, both agencies enjoy a vibrant two-way information sharing relationship that
enhances their common mission. Processes haye been carefully established to exchange lead
(foreign intelligence) information while protecting equities. The Customer Relationships
Directorate (51), the Datar?icquisition Directorate (53), and MRSCIC work with the SEFHCN office
as an integrated team to realise these mission successes.

Cure of those successes: Based on 5C5 (US-QEEL) intercept, S2FHCN issued an CIPS
IMMEDIATE report on 3D March 2:304 on the exact whereabouts of Colombian narcotics trafficker
Consalo I-linojosa, an eyasiye and brutal international fugitiye wanted for murder, drug trafficking,
and money laundering. 52F had the foresight to include a tearline to share the actionable
intelligence with Panamanian parmers. With a short window for action, nsas
worked through the Joint Interagency Task Force (JITF) - South to immediately forward the
information to DEr??UPanam a. DEr-?UPanama in alerted the Panamanian authorities who quickly
located and apprehended Hinojos a, without knowing the information came from NBA SICINT. r-?Ls

Chief note d, this is an esc ellent estam ple of outcom e- oriente collab or ation. 

  

To learn more about NBA support to the "other" warfighter, DEA, visit the International
Crime and Narcotics (52F) website.

SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside without
the consent of SD121 (DL 

Information Dual 012 1,
Page Publisher: SD121,
Last Modified: 11IDSI2012 Last
Reviewed: 

   
 

   
 

(e mail]
(email)

DYNAMIC PACE HICI-IEST CLASSIFICATION IS TOP SECRET If SI TK ff REL
TD USA AUS CAN CER NZL DERIVED FROM: 1-52, DATED JAN 
CIIN: EDSEDIUS

