DYNAMIC PAGE - HIGHEST
POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA
AUS CAN GBR NZL

Welcome! Saturday, 10 Nov 2012

•	Web search

•	Agency-all Emails

•	SED-all Emails

•	NS A Rolodex

•	SCOAWK: The SID Mailbag

•	SEDtoday Blog

•	SEDtoday Series

•	SIGINT Worldwide	VTC

•	SEDtoday Article

•	Letter to the Editor

•	SIGINT-y Social Media Page

(U) The SIGINT Philosopher: Lessons for Civil Servants from the American Civil
War (That Don't Concern Killing Vampires)

FROM: (U//FOUO)

Run Date: 10/22/2012

(U) I am an enthusiast of the American Civil War. I'm not
proud of this, as I long held that the Civil War' was the lone
preserve of aging, bearded, paunchy men namedwho
would make up for their lack of charisma by memorizing the
entire order of battle for Longstreet's wing at
Chancellorsville* * or reenacting Chickamauga on the
weekends with paintball guns. But eventually, it got to me.
It's hard to resist the compelling nature of the crucible of our
nation's history, especially when I live within two hours of a
dozen of the most important battles. I may have even been
seen celebrating the 150th anniversary of Antietam in
September at Sharpsburg. (Not as a re-enactor, although I do
have an excellent beard.)

(U) As I’ve begun to read a little deeper into the war, I can't
help but think that if I had been an adviser to Lincoln at the
outset of war' in 1861, I'd have probably told him that trying
to win such a war was insane. I think I'd have advised him

SERIES:

The SIGINT
Philosopher

1.	The SIGINT
Philosopher Is
Back — with a
New Face!

2.	The SIGINT
Philosopher:
Descartes Would
Have Been a
Lousy SIGINT
Reporter

3.	The SIGINT
Philosopher:
When Brevity Is
Just the Soul of
"Huh?"

4.	The SIGINT
Philosopher: hi
Praise of Not
Knowing

5

to win such a war was insane. I think I'd have advised him
that it was folly to try and fight a war to make a nation as
large as the South agree to rejoin the Union. Questions I'd
have raised might have included: "How will you raise an
Airny? Who will lead it when so many of the best officers are
from the South? How will you raise taxes to support it when
you have a population that hates taxes? What if Europe
intercedes? And what if, by some miracle, we can wm this
war - how will we govern a people who do not want to be
governed, and who may continue a low-level resistance
forever?"

(U) My reasoning would have been based on a pragmatic
philosophy that I've spent a lot of time developing, and which
I can elucidate eloquently. (Not as eloquently, though, as Jack
Sparrow elucidates the same philosophy when he hits Will
Turner upside the head and tells him "the only tiling hi this
world that matters is what I can do and what I can't do.") For
all my well-reasoned dissent, though, the advice I'd have
given Lincoln would have been wrong.

(U) We are all experts — or at least very well-informed -about
the issues we work. And there is a good chance that as an
expert, you may find that you disagree with our national
policy on the issue you work. If you are an expert in
information security, maybe you think our cyber security
posture is weak. If you are an expert hi Zendian foreign
policy, maybe you think we are taking too hawkish or too soft
a stance on the Zendian anus embargo. We probably all have
something we know a lot about that is being handled at a
higher level hi a maimer we're not entirely happy about. This
can cause great cognitive dissonance for us, because we may
feel our work is behig used to help the government follow a
policy we feel is bad.

(U) Such cognitive dissonance isn't new. U.S. Grant, the great
hero of the Civil War, first earned his bona fides in the
Mexican-American war. He wasn't entirely thrilled about his
role in that war, though. He once called the conflict "the most
unjust war a powerful nation ever inflicted upon a weaker
one." So how do we reconcile ourselves to behig cogs hi a
machine we flunk is damaging our own best interests?

(U) Many people may answer this with two versions of "it's
not my responsibility." You can take the less noble of the two
versions of tins and simply say "It's above my pay grade, and
as long as I'm getti g paid, it's on someone else if they mess
up." A higher form of this sentiment might say "I may not

The SIGINT
Philosopher:
Unlike All My
Terrible

Teammates, I Am
a Wonderful
Teammate
The SIGINT
Philosopher:
Lessons for Civil
Servants from the
American Civil
War (That Don't
Concern Killing
Vampires)

up." A higher form of this sentiment might say "I may not like
what decision makers are doing, but my oath is to uphold the
constitution, and as long as those decision makers are
operating constitutionally, I will put my own feelings aside,
and support them."

(U) The Civil War has helped me to see two other ways I
might reconcile my misgivings. First, I realize that as hard as
it is to believe, I might actually be wrong. I'd have been wrong
about the Civil War-, although I'd have had brilliant reasons for
being wrong. It is possible that, as much as I know about the
subject I am an expert in, I still might have managed to just be
wrong.

(U) Secondly, I realize that sometimes,you can be wrong and
still get away with it if you commit to the wrong thing with
enough determination. Legendary baseball pitcher Greg
Maddux was once asked about how he became such a
brilliant, foxy pitcher, always throwing the pitch that fooled
batters. He said he wasn't really a genius, but that if you throw
the pitch you mean to throw in the right location at the right
speed, it doesn't usually even matter if it’s the "right" pitch.
You'll still usually get a good result, and end up looking like a
genius.

(U) No Civil War figure demonstrated this successful
commitment to the wrong idea more than Confederate
General Robert E. Lee. His campaigns are a study of
foolhardiness that worked for the better part of two years.
Time and again, he would buck all military wisdom, attack
against greater forces, attack with his flank exposed, attack
when Venus was aligned with Pluto, attack, attack, attack. It
worked for so long in part because even though his plans may
not have always been very wise, he and everyone in his
command believed they would work, and committed to
making them work.

(U) So I try to be a good lieutenant and good civil servant of
even the policies I think are misguided. Perhaps I will be
wrong. Or perhaps, if I support a poor policy well enough, I
can make that policy look like it was a good one all along. At
the very least, I can always take solace that I have a really
cool beard.

(U) Notes:

* (U) Yes,^^^ I realize that Longstreet was not at
Chancellorsville.

Comments/Suggestions about this article?

"(U//FOUO) SIDtoday articles may not be republished or
reposted outside NSANet without the consent of S0121
(DL sid comms)."

Information Owner:

Page Publisher: |

Last Modified: 11/10/2012 / Last Reviewed: 11/10/2012

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE
CLASSIFICATION IS

TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR

NZL

DERIVED FROM: NSA/CSSM 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007
DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108