SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031

Sensitive Metadata Analytic Collaboration (SMAC)
Concept of Operations
October 2006

Background

In June 2004 via the Alice Springs Resolution (ASR), the SIGINT Agency Heads agreed
to the development of a system to provide a single query access to all metadata
repositories across the Australian, Canadian, New Zealand, United Kingdom and United
States Signals Intelligence community. The concept was reiterated in 2005 June in the
Cheltenham Resolution and a solid commitment to action was undertaken by NSA and
GCHQ after the London bombings in July 2005 (when unprecedented sensitive metadata
sharing occurred). That "system" was substantiated in the Sensitive Metadata Analytic
Collaboration (SMAC), a collaborative 5-Eyes team furthering the SIGINT mission by
performing analysis and enabling optimal use of sensitive metadata. This Concept of
Operations will define the purpose, organizational structure, scope and procedures of
SMAC. It will also project to a possible future state.

Purpose

The practical implementation of the vision stated in the ASR requires policy, legal and
technical coordination between the partners. Furthermore, it requires cultural change.
SMAC will work with related delivery mechanisms to jointly address these coordination
and cultural issues to achieve the sharing goal.

Vision

In collaboration with our foreign partners, further the SIGINT mission by performing
analysis and enabling optimal use of sensitive metadata.

Organizational Structure

When an employee is selected to participate in SMAC, they are indoctrinated into SMAC
by the SMAC Lead and their National Steering Committee member. Only those members
who have been briefed to the SMAC process can participate in SMAC activities. This is
required to educate the participant in the sensitivities involved in the SMAC process to
assure all equities are protected.

Steering Committee

Membership: One senior-level person from each of the 5-Eyes Agencies.

Role:	Ensure effective and authorized operation of the SMAC analytic team on

behalf of the 5-Eyes community.

Responsibilities:

•	authorizing SMAC business lines

ensuring national authorization for release of SMAC products into the
Intelligence Community (IC)

•	advocating SMAC within National Agency and ensuring stakeholder buy-
in

Derived From: NSA/CSSM 1-52
Dated: 20070108
Declassify On: 22012031

SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031

SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031

•	providing prioritization guidelines

•	providing strategic guidance on the issues affecting national contribution
to the SMAC analytic team

tasking National Agency to ensure effective resolution of any issues
identified by SMAC analytic team; tracking those actions
reporting on SMAC analytic team progress (including metrics) to
respective seniors

resourcing the SMAC analytic team

•	meet quarterly
SMAC Analytic Team

Membership: At least one representative from each of the 5-Eyes Agencies, fully cleared
to access all metadata from National holdings and knowledgeable about
national sensitive collection.

Role:	Ensure effective and appropriate handling of and response to SMAC

tasking, on behalf of the 5-Eyes community.

Responsibilities:

Respond to tasking by ensuring: complete and timely results, within the
timescales requested; timely dissemination of SMAC products to all
interested parties; protection of National sensitivities in communication of
SMAC work; unresolved issues around 5-Eyes sharing are known to the
Steering Committee.

Act as a conduit for National Agency tasking by: effectively
communicating the task, its priority, and any sensitivities to ensure other
partners can respond; contribute to agreement on approved dissemination
of the results with the requesting Agency/community; tracking timeliness
of the response; obtain and collate feedback for the contributing Agencies
to derive value-added statistics; track and document tasking and results;
educate analysts within National Agency on SMAC and its contribution to
the SIGINT mission.

•	Develop expertise on metadata resources by: developing an understanding
of National metadata resources and the associated legal, policy and
technical restrictions on sharing; negotiating the approved dissemination
of this information in response to mission needs.

Identify barriers to sharing and business process improvement by:
highlighting issues restricting sharing of operationally relevant metadata,
with recommendations for improvement; ensuring that SMAC processes
do not become a cottage industry through migration of successful business
processes into main business lines.

Appropriately handle sensitive communications involved in SMAC daily
operations to maintain the trust required for sharing sensitive information
between the partners. This has been referred to as "SMAC Channels
Only".

Intelligence Community

SMAC was established by the SIGINT Directors to improve sharing of sensitive
metadata among the 5-Eyes SIGINT Community. Since this is an agreement amongst the
SIGINT Directors, the formal agreement does not extend to other members of the

SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031

SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031

Intelligence Community (IC). It is recognized that SIGINT does not work in a vacuum
and that there is benefit to expanding the collaboration to include other members of the
IC. Each Nation will manage this inclusion process with coordination and cooperation of
all members of SMAC. The SIGINT partners are a model for collaboration at a level of
trust that is not enjoyed by other IC partners. SMAC can be used as an avenue to
demonstrate the power of collaboration, but this path must be taken slowly with caution
and respect for all involved. This is not to say that selectors from our other partners
cannot be submitted to the SMAC RFI process at the discretion of the SMAC National
representative. These "sensitive" selectors will be protected by SMAC according to the
handling caveats mandated by the National representative.

Scope of Mission

SMAC has both tactical and strategic objectives which are both being aggressively
pursued. The tactical objective is implemented predominately through the Request for
Information (RFI) process which leads to systemic changes. The strategic objective is
implemented through results from the investigative nature of the team. Strategic
initiatives will sometimes be the result of the outcome of tactical actions and other times
the result of highlighting barriers to sharing that have been identified.

Regardless of the nature of the action, tactical or strategic, the sensitivity of the
information provided is dictated by the National representative and honored by the
SMAC team. Selectors, results of queries against those selectors, operational information
regarding the task, ... each aspect is protected according to the instructions determined by
the National representative. Adherence to this practice must be absolute.

Tactical Procedures:

SMAC has established an RFI process that is documented on the SMAC web page,
accessible by all 5-Eyes partners. The process is initiated by the completion of a Request
Form (Appendix A) by any analyst desiring the sensitive source metadata available. The
NSA process after an RFI submission is documented in Appendix B. There is a slight
variation of this process for the other SMAC members, but the concept of sensitive
information being accepted into SMAC ("sensitive in") and the potential for sensitive
information being provided back to the requestor ("sensitive out") is one which is
adhered to by all SMAC participants. Information on the process is also available to
analysts in the Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) document on the web page (Appendix
C). The National SMAC representative lists the RFI in a spreadsheet (Appendix D) and
tracks the outcome and feedback. Feedback is requested for all SMAC RFIs using a
SMAC feedback form (Appendix E).

Given that the current status of SMAC does not include physical representation of
National representatives for all 5-Eyes having access to all sensitive metadata repositories
at NSAW, procedures for handling SMAC requests include the transfer of information
back to a SMAC point person back at their Agency. This point person handles the request
and does not distribute the information further internally, and returns the results back to
the SMAC National representative here at NSAW.

Since SMAC has taken on the responsibility for the 24 hour/ 7 days per week ability to
respond to tactical operational requirements, previously owned by the now-defunct
JINTAC, a procedure to execute this capability must be established and implemented.

SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031

SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031

SMAC Responsibilities in Threat-to-life Scenarios

(S//FVEY) In the effort to maximize the amount of metadata shared between the 5-
EYES, SMAC developed an RFI process allowing analysts from any of the 5-EYES to
request sanitized and/or minimized metadata on strong selectors from sources not
automatically shared to support sensitive operations. Within this RFI process, information
outlining analytic motivation behind the targeting and the timeliness is provided by the
requestor to the SMAC national representative. This information is often shared without
fear of further distribution amongst the trusted 5-EYES SMAC team and can contain
analysis indicating threat-to-life. In most situations, this would mandate that each of the
SMAC analysts take action to initiate their national process for notifying the appropriate
people about the imminent threat but in this case, it is only the responsibility of the
requester to make their superiors aware of the threat. Should SMAC take this action, it
could potentially jeopardize ongoing operations; the SMAC analyst needs to be exempt
from invoking the normal Threat-to-Life process defined by their SIGINT agency.
(S//FVEY) SMAC provides 5-EYES analysts with access to sensitive or routinely
unshared target-related information held by second parties. It is ultimately the
responsibility of the requesting agency to disseminate information via the appropriate
channel/s from this or any subsequent further analysis that either suggests or indicates
that there is an imminent or immediate threat to human/s life of a citizen/s of a second
party Agency. SMAC bears no responsibility to disseminate information indicating a
Threat-to-Life. The requesting agency analyst need refer to their respective Inter-Agency
policy for guidance for Threat-to-Life reporting requirements.

Strategic Procedures:

Marketing SMAC

Marketing of the SMAC capability had been done in a variety of forums and this effort
will continue for the duration of the SMAC mission.

Briefings

Briefings to management teams, at major annual conferences (A&P, SIGDEV, European

SIGDEV, ...) at educational seminars, and influential individuals are examples of

attempts to educate the 5-Eyes community on SMAC.

Face-to-Face Communications

Visits to each of the 5-Eyes should be conducted to reinforce local communication about
SMAC. Personal interaction at the office level for specific targets must be regularly
undertaken.

Documentation

Quarterly reports will be written to document the status of SMAC activities. These
reports are to be distributed to the Analytic Team and Steering Committee, and the
Steering Committee may distribute in their National Agency as they deem appropriate.
SMAC has a web page that is accessible by all members of the 5-Eyes. Information there
includes the SMAC mission, points of contacts, forms to submit RFIs, FAQs, a single-

SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031

SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031

page fact sheet, and listing of relevant documents (strategies, legal and policy papers) on
sharing metadata in the 5-Eyes community.

A Business Plan will be written to include an IT infrastructure outline and a budget for
the near term and out years to maintain the SMAC capability.

Future of SMAC

Phase One

Phase one of the implementation of SMAC is dominated by the successful completion of
a process to handle the tactical aspects of the mission need. The RFI process should be
robust and fail-proof. Metrics used to measure the success of the RFI process include:
Track the origin of the sensitive metadata (while protecting the source) so the
value of the source can be measured;

The source of the requestor by Agency and organization within the Agency;

The number of times an Agency provided unique contributions;

The number of DNR requests for which SMAC provided unique metadata;

•	The number of DNI requests for which SMAC provided unique metadata;

The number of overall RFIs submitted, differentiated by Agency;

This success will lead to the identification of barriers which need to be addressed to
facilitate systemic change to enhance the mission. The completion of phase one will be
judged by statistics generated by the SMAC Analytic Team and the continuation of
support by the Steering Committee.

Phase Two

Phase two of the implementation of the SMAC concept will require an enhancement of
the current effort and will focus more on the collaborative and investigative aspects of the
uniqueness of the 5-Eyes team. SMAC, the method for sharing sensitive metadata, will be
but one element of the new effort.

SMAC will undertake the 5-Eyes requirements identified by the SIGINT Directors as
well as others. For instance, at the Pre-Chesapeake Meeting 2006, the following
requirements could be absorbed into the SMAC mission:

•	#8. (S//SI) Explore development of "ground rules" for secondary sharing (beyond
SIGINT community) and dissemination of metadata to counter potentially
revealing sources and methods.

•	#9. (S//SI) Examine the policy and legal issues that prevent the sharing of
metadata among the 5-Eyes partners. (SMAC already does this.)

Plan for SMAC Failure

Plans need to be in place to address the following potential SMAC "Failures":

•	Lack of participation by each of the 5-Eyes;

Information that can and should be shared using the SMAC system which is not
shared for one reason or another;

•	Lack of trust between the 5-Eyes partners.

The current plan to address these types of failures is to use the Steering Committee to
address the issues first and then, if not successful, raise the issue to their leadership at
their National Agencies. The leaders of each of National Agencies would then provide
suggestions for actions, which the Steering Committee and/or SMAC would undertake to
resolve the issue.

SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031

SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031

SECRET//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR, NZL//22012031