 NEWS INVESTIGATIONS investigations.nbcnews.com

The Snowden Files: British Spies Used and 'Dirty Tricks'
Slideshow No. 

GCHQ, the British signals intelligence agency, prepared the
following slides for a top-secret spy conference in 2012, describing
cyber operations. The slides focus on the efforts of a unit, the Joint
Intelligence Threat Research Group, or TRIG. According to the
documents, JTRIG conducts "honey traps," sends adversaries
computer viruses, deletes their online presence, and employs
several other tactics. Documents previously published by NBC
News showed JTRIG engaged in cyber attacks on the hacktivist
collective known as Anonymous.

The slides were leaked by former NSA ontractor Edward Snowden
and obtained exclusively by NBC News. NBC News is publishing

the documents with minimal redactions to protect individuals. The

presenter's notes for the slideshow are included.

NEWS INVESTIGATIONS 

 

Joint Threat
Research
Intelligence
Cyber Integration Group, a
?The art of the possible" GCHQ Un't
focused on
cyber
forensics.

JTRIG GCHQ espimge

and covert

CDO CHQ operations

 

 

 

 

investigations.nbcnews.com

JTRIG has the following core functions:
- Covert Internet Investigations
Forensic Investigation and Analysis

Active Covert Internet Operations, (including online Humint and Effects)
Covert Technical Operations
Provision of Unattributable Internet Access

Development of new capability

 

Explanation of the ?base?line? for JTRIG?related work and make-up:

The structure of JTRIG:
- Ops Technical (Cap Dev) JBOS.

Mention the ?Online Covert Action Accreditation? Programme.
- Commenced September 2011.
- Initially for JTRIG staff.

- A small number of now being accepted on courses.

Main skills covered:

- Information In?uence Operations.
- Online Humint.

- Disruption CNA.

- Briefing to be provided by 

NEWS INVESTIGATIONS investigations.nbcnews.com

Development of new capability:
- Capabilities being developed to access data from various intemet services

How these data sources may help to mitigate the loss that passive access could
Suffer to etc

- How to look further at integrating l? fusing these data sources into our analytic stores
and work?ows



 NEWS INVESTIGATIONS investigations.nbcnews.com

?Using online techniques to make something
happen in the real or cyber world?

Two broad categories:
Information Ops (influence or disruption)
- Technical disruption

Known in GCHQ as Online Covert Action

The 4 D?s: Deny Disrupt/ Degrade Deceive

 

Key statement is the initial one.
Explain the categories more.

The one thing to remember for JTRIG is the 4 

NEWS INVESTIGATIONS investigations.nbcnews.com 

 

 NEWS INVESTIGATIONS investigations.nbcnews.com

Bombard their phone with text messages
Bombard their phone with calls
Delete their online presence

Block up their fax machine

 

 

SMO examples from Afghanistan.

- Significantly disrupting Taleban Operations.

- Sending targets a text message every 10 seconds or so.
- Calling targets consistently on a regular basis.

Ability to delete a target?s online presence. Very aimoyingll

Older type of Effects, but faxes are still used in some areas.



 NEWS INVESTIGATIONS investigations.nbcnews.com

- Set up a honey-trap
- Change their photos on social networking sites
Write a blog purporting to be one of their victims

- Email/text their colleagues, neighbours, friends etc

 

Honey-trap; a great option. Very successful when it works.

- Get someone to go somewhere on the internet, or a physical location to be
met by a ?friendly face?.

- IT RIG has the ability to ?shape? the environment on occasions.

Photo change; you have been warned, is aboutll?

Can take ?paranoia? to a whole new level.

Blog writing:
- Has worked on a number of different Ops.

- One example is on a Serious Crime 013- -

- Other examples on Iran work.

Emailftext:
- In?ltration work.
- Helps JTRIG acquire credibility with online groups etc.

 75?: NBC NEWS INVESTIGATIONS

 



 NEWS INVESTIGATIONS investigations.nbcnews.com


- Leak confidential information to companies the
press via blogs etc

Post negative information on appropriate forums

- Stop deals ruin business relationships

 

Info Ops style work:
- Use of Open Source info andfor releasable Sigint items.

- Attempts to inform the public, where necessary (government protected
environment)

- First stages of disruption andfor discrediting companies I organisations

Stop fdivert the ?ow of funding. Introduce panic etc.

Place ?secret? information on a compromised
computer

- Send ?secret? information across a network visible
to Sigint

- Provide ?secret? information through an online
agent

 

Work alongside CNE:
Use of various masquerade type techniques.
- Placement of potential ?damming? information, where appropriate.

Visible networks:
- Shape the environment, so that Sigint can provide BDA for Operations.
- Use of releasable information, (support ?'om etc).

Online agent:
- Use of online aliases to good effect.
- Visiny shaping the online environment.

 
 

     

    NBC NEWS INVESTIGATIONS

. c,

investigations.nbcnews.com

it Send them a virus:

- AMBASSADORS RECEPTION itself, delete

all emails, all files, make screen shake, no
more log on

0 Conduct a Denial of Service attack on their computer

Virus sending:

- Use of various TRIG tools, including AMBASSADORS RECEPTION.
Has been used in a variety of different areas, very effective.

KENBC NEWS INVESTIGATIONS investigations.nbcnews.com

- Use of active techniques to collect intelligence required
to map out:
- Who does what?
- What institutions etc are being used?
What companies?
- Who sets up the websites?
- How do they communicate between ministerles
and or each other?
- How do they communicate to investors?
- How do they store information?

 

Some basic questions, that are normally associated with scoping potential
Active Ops.

In essence Intelligence use SIGINT to answer the ?pattern of life?
question.

But. . . do they know the ?online pattern of life? for their target set?!

Do the analyst?s know not just what their target is doing, but what is it


rifl?iNBC NEWS INVESTIGATIONS investigations.nbcnews.com

- How do we measure the impact of ?effects??

?Blitz? style approach:
- Creating as much disruption as possible within a
short period of time

More subtle approach:
- Effects use less liker to be detected, therefore
- More sustainable over a longer period of time

 

Two main ways to measure the impact of ?Effects? Operations.

NEWS INVESTIGATIONS investigations.nbcnews.com



Pros:

Provide an opportunity for JTRIG to be
more actively involved with ISD counterparts

Enable further upskilling CZC etc)

Provide JTRIG with the opportunity to
identify CNA?type options a lot earlier in Operations

Provides ISD a greater baseline and
understanding of JTRIG work

An Opportunity for to learn new ACNO
skills, On-line HUMINT etc)

 

NEWS INVESTIGATIONS investigations.nbcnews.com

Cons:

Current lack of JTRIG IT infrastructure on the general
floor?plate

Lack of wider resource investment
Lack of overall training and support resources

Integration process will be resource intensive for CDO

 

