To the Country Representative of the Republic of Nicaragua,

i, Edward Snowden, citizen of the United States of America, am writing to
request asylum in the Republic of Nicaragua because of the risk of being persecuted
by the government of' the United States and its agents in relation to my decision to
make public serious violations on the part of the government of the United States
of its Constitution, specifically of its Fourth and Fifth Amendments, and of
various treaties of the United Nations that are binding on my country. As a result
of my political opinions, and my desire to exercise my freedom of speech, through
which I’ve shown that, the government of the United States is intercepting the
majority of communications in the world, the government of the United States has
publicly announced a criminal investigation against me.

Prominent members of Congress and others in the media have accused me of being
a traitor and have called for me to be jailed or executed as a result of having-
communicated tins information to the public. Some of the charges that have been
presented against me by the Justice Department of the United States arc connected
to the 1917 Espionage Act, one of which includes life in prison among the possible
sentences.

An international precedent for providing asylum to figures in my circumstances
has already been established, with Ecuador granting asylum to the founder of
WikiLeaks, Julian Assange in relation to this kind of retaliatory investigation.

My case is also very similar to that of the American soldier Bradley Manning, who
made public government information through WikiLeaks revealing war crimes, was
arrested by the United States government and has been treated inhumanely during his
time in prison. He was put in solitary confinement before his trial and the U. N,
anti-torture representative judged that Mr. Manning was submitted to cruel and
inhumane acts by the United States government.

The trial against Bradley Manning is ongoing now, and secret documents have
been presented to the court and secret witnesses have testified. I believe that,
given these circumstances, it is unlikely that I would receive a fair trial or
proper treatment prior to that trial, and face the possibility of Life in prison or
even death.

Edward Joseph Snowden
Moscow. 30 June 2013