 

mmpmer Center Intro: Here in 52F, we've had great success

using systems that buffer full-take audio collection for a

I- nominal 3U days -- these systems have led to real
breakthroughs in target discovery -- and we wanted to alert
ether to their potential. Collectors: please take note
ofhow beneficial these types of collectors can be to
as compared to more traditional models.

 

 

 

SDMALGET is a family of collection systems which greatly facilitate and
make possible remarkable new ways of performing both target development1 and target

discovery.2 Signi?cant analytic breakthroughs and successes in both areas have been
made STD in the two cotmtries where SDMALGET accesses currently exist
and the Bahamas).

(U) How It Works:

SDMALGET collection systems forwardI full?take rnetadata in real time

and buffer full?take audio for nominally 30 days.3 It makES the 5919mm" ?f
audio content against the buffered data after the fact, in near real-time, or up to 3D days
later. This ability is dubbed "retrospective retrieval." The power of retrospective
retrieval in facilitating target development or discovery lies in its ability to permit the
analyst to selectively ren'ieve audio content and immediately validate hisfher tentative
analytic conclusions derived from metadata.

0 (TSHSIHREL) SOMALGET access to Bahamian GEM commtmications has led to
the discovery of international narcotics traf?ckers and special?interest alien
smugglers. This access -- together with DUI use of methods that take advantage of

targets' behavioral patterns4 -- have allowed our 52F to gain a firm
tuiderstanding of the targets' activities even when these contacts occtu'red prior to
their discovery.

(U) More to Come?

These successes, which depend on access to buffered audio files that may
be associated with selectors not tasked to the collection asset in question, argue in
favor of a collection methodology for telephony tirat may be viewed as analogous to
XKE That is, we buffer certain calls tirat .MAY be of foreign intelligence
value for a suf?cient period to per?rui a well?informed decision on wiretirer to
retrieve and return speci?c audio content. i-?Jith proper engineering and coordination,
there is little reason this capability cainiot expand to other accesses (besides

_and the Bahamas), provided compatible hardware and interfaces are
developed and deployed.5

(U) Notes:

1. (U) Target development the process by which an analyst can extend hist'her
knowledge of a known target by observing elements of metadata that relate to that
target.

2. (U) Target discovery the process whereby an analyst can discover targets by
observing metadata as it relates to behaviors characteristic of lliSfllEl? target set,
regardless of whether or not the newly discovered selectors are related to laiown
targets.

3. The nominal days storage" actually varies depending upon on
space, power, and observed activity levels.

4. Observing that targets tend to use prepaid calling cards in an attempt
to mask the destination of telephone calls, SZF focused on mobile identifiers in number
ranges that represent newly activated accotmts. We have also used SMS text messages
to identify and renieve audio of interest.

5. Storage capacity is directly related to the amotuit of disk storage that
can be deployed. ?When deployed against entire networks, as SDMALGET is, the back-
end database and processing required for interactive search and retrieval of cuts also
requires enterprise-class data warehousing and high-performance processing to manage
the vast amotuit of data caputred. Currently this warehouse dynamically manages
roughly 5 billion call events, with the capacity to expand well beyond our current target
commtmications. This retrospective retrieval infrastructure is web based and is already
in place. As noted, with proper engineering and coordination, there is little reason this
capability cainiot expand to other accesses, provided compatible hardware and
interfaces are developed and deployed.

