EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL POLICIES

POLICY DEPARTMENT

CITIZENS' RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS W

EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

DIRECTORATE GENERAL FOR INTERNAL POLICIES

POLICY DEPARTMENT C: CITIZENS' RIGHTS AND
CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

Fighting cyber crime and
protecting privacy in the cloud

STUDY

Abstract

This study addresses the challenges raised by the growing reliance on
cloud computing. It starts by investigating the issues at stake and
explores how the EU is addressing the identified concerns. The study
then examines the legal aspects in relation to the right to data
protection, the issues of jurisdiction, responsibility and regulation of data
transfers to third countries. These questions have been neglected in EU
policies and strategies, despite very strong implications on EU data
sovereignty and the protection of citizens' rights.

PE 462.509

EN

This document was requested by the European Parliament's Committee on Civil Liberties,
Justice and Home Affairs

AUTHORS

Prof. Didier Bigo (Centre d'Etudes sur les Conflits, C&C)

Mr Gertjan Boulet (under coordination of the Centre for European Policy Studies, CEPS)

Mr Caspar Bowden (under coordination of the Centre d'Etudes sur les Conflits, C&C)

Dr Sergio Carrera (Centre for European Policy Studies, CEPS)

Dr Julien Jeandesboz (Centre d'Etudes sur les Conflits, C&C)

Dr Amandine Scherrer (Centre d'Etudes sur les Conflits, C&C)

Under coordination of the Justice and Home Affairs Section of the Centre for European
Policy Studies (CEPS) and the Centre d'Etudes sur les Conflits (C&C)

RESPONSIBLE ADMINISTRATOR

Mr Alessandro DAVOLI

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs
European Parliament
B-1047 Brussels

E-mail: alessandro.davoli@europarl.europa.eu

LINGUISTIC VERSIONS

Original: EN

ABOUT THE EDITOR

To contact the Policy Department or to subscribe to its monthly newsletter please write to:
poldep-citizens@europarl.europa.eu

European Parliament, Manuscript completed in October 2012.

© European Union, 2012.

This document is available on the Internet at:
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/studies

DISCLAIMER

The opinions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do
not necessarily represent the official position of the European Parliament.

Reproduction and translation for non-commercial purposes are authorized, provided the
source is acknowledged and the publisher is given prior notice and sent a copy.

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

CONTENTS

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS	5

LIST OF FIGURES	7

Executive Summary	8

General information	10

INTRODUCTION	12

1.1.	Cloud computing technologies	13

1.2.	Cloud computing, cybercrime and privacy: what are the challenges? 14

2.	ClOUD COMPUTING, CYBERCRIME, PRIVACY: THE EU FRAMEWORK 15

2.1.	What is at risk with the cloud?	17

2.2.	Cloud computing and the EU legal, policy and operational framework 18

3.	THE TRIANGULAR DIPLOMACY OF CLOUD COMPUTING AND THE

IMPLICATIONS FOR THE INDIVIDUAL	27

3.1.	The triangular diplomacy of cloud computing: states, companies and

inter-state relations	27

3.2.	The companies/states/inter-state relations	31

3.3.	The states/inter-state/companies relations	32

3.4.	The inter-state/states/companies relation	34

4.	CLOUD COMPUTING AND CYBERCRIME: LEGAL CHALLENGES FOR DATA

PROTECTION LAW	35

4.1.	Definitional dilemma in the EU data protection legal framework	37

4.2.	The challenge of jurisdiction	38

4.3.	The challenge of responsibility: data controller, data processor and

personal data	40

4.4.	Data transfers/processing to third countries	42

4.5.	The challenge of regulation for EU Home affairs agencies	45

5.	RECOMMENDATIONS	46

5.1.	EU General Priorities	46

5.2.	Extension of the scope of data protection and harmonization of legal

concepts	47

5.3.	Oversight of EU agencies in the field	48

3

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

5.4. US/EU Relations	48
5.5. EU ownership over data	48
References	49
Annexes	54

4

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

AWFs	Analysis Work Files
CERTs	Computer Emergency Response Teams
CIIP	Critical Information Infrastructure Protection
CLP	Cloud Legal Project
DoS	Denial-of-Service
DPA	Data Protection Authority
DPD	Data Protection Directive
DPFD	Data Protection Framework Decision
EC3	European Cyber Crime Centre
EDPS	European Data Protection Supervisor
ENISA	European Network and Information Security Agency
ENU	Europol National Units
EPCIP	European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection
EU ISS	EU Internal Security Strategy
EWS	Amazon Web Services
FISAA	Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Amendment Act
HTCC	High Tech Crime Centre
IaaS	Infrastructure-as-a-Service
ICT	Information and Communication Technology
iOCTA	Internet Facilitated Organised Crime Report
LEA	Law Enforcement Authorities
NASA	National Aeronautic Space Administration
NIS	Network and Information Security
OASIS	Organisation for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards
OCSIA	UK Office of Cyber Security and Information Assurance
PaaS	Plaftorm-as-a-Service
PGDPR	Proposal for a General Data Protection Regulation
PPCJDD	Proposal for a Police and Criminal Justice Data Protection Directive
SaaS	Software-as-a-Service

5

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

SHA Safe Harbour Agreement
SLA Service Level Agreement
WP29 Article 29 Data Protection Working Party

6

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

LIST OF FIGURES

FIGURE 1: The relation between NIS, cybercrime and data protection seen by DG INFSO
.....................................................................................22

FIGURE 2: The triangular diplomacy of cloud computing from the point of view of the
global regulation of the	Internet...............................................29

FIGURE 3: The triangular diplomacy of cloud computing from the point of view of the
individual...........................................................................30

7

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Background

While cloud computing is not a new technology per se and has been developed and
marketed primarily for profit-driven purposes, the growing reliance on its infrastructures
and services poses a series of challenges for EU strategies and policies. This study
addresses these challenges, examining the current EU framework in the field and
highlighting the legal aspects in relation to the right to data protection, the issue of
jurisdiction, responsibility and the regulation of data transfers to third countries.

Aim

The study starts by investigating the issues at stake when dealing with cloud computing
(Sections 1 and 2). It suggests that the main concern arising for private citizens,
companies and public administration using cloud technologies is not so much the
possible increase in "cyber" fraud or crime than the loss of control over one's
data. From a risk-assessment perspective, the higher risk is indeed to be found in the
management of the data contained in data centres, whether this management is of a
criminal nature or not.

Currently, the EU framework on cloud computing in relation to cybercrime lacks a clear
sense of direction, priorities and practical coordination (Section 2.2). The various
components of the EU's cybercrime policy framework fall under the responsibility of
different services and involve different groups of experts and 'stakeholders'. The
Commission's decision to locate the European cybercrime centre (EC3) within EUROPOL
raises further questions over the respective roles of the European Network and Information
Security Agency (ENISA) and EUROPOL. Moreover, the way in which the Commission
envisages the role of EC3 perpetuates the habit of providing a list of activities, blurring
priorities and a sense of direction, as well as a reliable assessment of the resources that are
required to meet the stated goals. However, the main concern remains the lack of a
concept of 'cybercrime' within the EU. This has direct implications for the functioning of the
proposed EC3 as part of EUROPOL and creates a wider degree of uncertainty for the
individual as regards lower data protection standards for 'cybercrime' and whether this
differs from other crimes such as 'computer crime' and/or other 'serious crimes'. In the
field of cybercrime, the study thus strongly underlines that the challenge of privacy in a
cloud context is underestimated, if not ignored (Section 3). In most European fora
dealing with cybercrime, Data Protection laws appear to be marginalised in the agenda and
inadequately addressed. The data subject and its protection are therefore key to ensure
that the rule of law, democratic principles and human rights are guaranteed by EU law and
regulations.

This study therefore examines in depth what is at stake from the perspective of data
protection and privacy (Sections 3 and 4). The set of relations currently defining cloud
computing technologies encompasses negotiations and tensions between public authorities,
private entities and public and private authorities. In this set of relationships, data
protection and privacy are often objects of negotiation to the detriment of individual rights.
Where cloud computing is possibly most disruptive is where it breaks away from the
forty-year-old legal model for international data transfers, jeopardising the rights of
the EU citizens:

8

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

•	Consumers' rights are subsumed into a complex mesh of contracts among private
entities. Therefore, from a legal perspective, the challenge of jurisdiction is central.
The legal determination of both the responsibilities and legal liabilities of data
controllers and processors and the rights of the individual as 'data subject' are
paramount.

•	Lack of legal certainty surrounding the concept of cybercrime and legal frameworks
of cloud-based investigations, as well as inadequate tools to safeguard privacy and
data protection increase the potential for misuses and abuses by law enforcement
actors and agencies. European citizens' data are not sufficiently protected in this
regard. This aspect is enhanced by exceptional measures taken in the name of
security and the fight against terrorism. The US context is here particularly
illuminating, both in the case of the Patriot Act and in the case of the US Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Amendment Act (FISAA) of 2008. In this case, the question
of the legal framework of data transfers/processing to third countries is critical.

These elements, examined throughout this study, have been neglected in EU policies and
strategies, despite their very strong implications for EU data sovereignty and the protection
of citizens' rights.

9

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

GENERAL INFORMATION

KEY FINDINGS

•	The main concern arising from the growing reliance on cloud computing is less the
possible increase in cyber fraud or crime than the loss of control over individual
identity and data.

•	To a large extent, cloud computing is not a genuinely new technology, it contributes
to the growth of cross-border transfers of data and as such poses a set of original
challenges to EU policies, including with regard cybercrime and privacy.

•	These challenges comprise, first and foremost, the establishment of clear priorities
in the current set of measures implemented by EU agencies, bodies and institutions
in relation to "cyber" security matters. Who is most at risk in the context of cloud
computing, and how these risks come about, are core questions in this regard.

•	Cloud computing raises a number of specific legal challenges in relation to the right
to data protection, including the development of a legal definition of cybercrime, the
issue of jurisdiction and responsibility, the regulation of data transfers to third
countries, and of the work of EU agencies.

•	Risks associated with cloud computing are an exacerbation of traditional information
security concerns. The risk faced by individuals using cloud services is the most
central.

•	There is considerable disagreement over the risks that can actually be attributed to
cybercrime. Some experts consider that companies are most at risk and face the
steepest costs, while others argue convincingly that average citizens are the most
concerned.

•	The various components of the EU's cybercrime policy framework currently fall
under the responsibility of different services and involve different groups of experts
and 'stakeholders'. This contributes to unclear priorities and possible misallocation of
resources.

•	The Commission's decision to locate the European cybercrime centre (EC3) within
EUROPOL raises the question of the respective roles of ENISA and EUROPOL.

•	The way in which the Commission envisages the role of EC3 perpetuates the habit of
providing a list of activities, blurring priorities and a sense of direction, and lacking a
reliable assessment of the resources that are required to meet agreed goals.

•	The set of relations currently defining cloud computing technologies encompasses
negotiations and tensions between public authorities, private entities and public and
private authorities. In this set of relationships, data protection and privacy are often
objects of negotiations to the detriments of the individuals' rights.

•	If one places the individuals and her/his rights at the centre of the discussion, the
cybercrime dimension is but one of the pending issues. Where cloud computing is
possibly the most disruptive is in the fact that cloud computing breaks away from
the forty-year-old legal model for international data transfers.

•	In the field of cybercrime, the challenge of privacy in a cloud context is
underestimated, if not ignored. In most European fora dealing with cybercrime, Data

10

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

Protection laws appear to be very marginal in the agenda and inadequately
addressed to meet the challenges.

•	The question of privacy and data protection is furthermore challenged by
exceptional measures taken in the name of security and the fight against terrorism.
The US context is here particularly highlighting, both in the case of the Patriot Act
and in the case of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Amendment Act (FISAA) of
2008. These elements have been totally neglected, despite very strong implications
on EU data sovereignty and the protection of its citizens' rights.

•	Conceptual uncertainties emerge in relation to the wide room of discretion by the
Member States at times of establishing jurisdiction i.e. the applicable implementing
law of the Member State under the Data Protection Directive (DPD). This most
directly causes uncertainty for any affected individual who might face conflict of laws
resulting from the multiple national implementing legislations. A targeting/directing
test would establish jurisdiction in relation to data connected to the EU, but would
not rule out conflict of laws nor preclude secret surveillance by third countries. Yet,
these initiatives should be seen as valuable tool to ensure that US companies are "in
principle" covered by EU Data Protection Law

•	An'accountability approach' would imply the vesting of obligations and liabilities
upon every actor with considerable power, i.e. knowledge and control of the
personal data. This explains why anonymous data, i.e. data to which there is a
minimized risk of unauthorized access, are no 'personal data' in the DPD. Standard
setting on the EU level as regards what constitutes personal data would contribute
to a harmonized approach to the "who" question (see Annex 2), i.e. who is the cloud
user data (joint) controller, data processor, data subject. This "who" question is
important in light of the question of jurisdiction and the resulting or potential
responsibilities, liabilities and obligations towards the individual.

•	Definitional uncertainties also emerge in relation to self-regulatory data protection
regimes 'quite separate from the wider EU level framework on data protection',
when assessing data transfers to third countries. The notion of 'adequacy' as
regards data transfers to third countries is defined on several levels (Member
States, European Commission and EUROPOL), and this further expands the
vulnerability of the data subject as regards what actually are 'adequate data
protection standards', and the capacity to control her/his data as a fundamental
right. This is exacerbated by the lack of a concept of cybercrime within the EU,
which creates even more legal uncertainty for the individual as regards the
justification of lower data protection standards for cybercrime.

11

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

INTRODUCTION

KEY FINDINGS

•	The main concern arising from the growing reliance on cloud computing is less the
possible increase in cyber fraud or crime than the loss of control over individual
identity and data.

•	To a large extent, cloud computing is not a genuinely new technology, it contributes
to the growth of cross-border transfers of data and as such poses a set of original
challenges to EU policies, including with regard cybercrime and privacy.

•	These challenges comprise, first and foremost, the establishment of clear priorities
in the current set of measures implemented by EU agencies, bodies and institutions
in relation to "cyber" security matters. Who is most at risk in the context of cloud
computing, and how these risks come about, are core questions in this regard.

•	Cloud computing raises a number of specific legal challenges in relation to the right
to data protection, including the development of a legal definition of cybercrime, the
issue of jurisdiction and responsibility, the regulation of data transfers to third
countries, and of the work of EU agencies.

This study argues that the main concern arising from the growing reliance on cloud
computing by private citizens, companies and public administration is less the possible
increase in "cyber" fraud or crime than the loss of control over individual identity and data.
As we will detail further below (1.1.), cloud computing does make cross-border transfers of
data ubiquitous and instantaneous in our "information societies". As such, cloud computing
has drawn the attention on the need for a global regulation of the Internet, but this focus
on regulation has rendered the individual and his rights invisible. The discussion has
concentrated on issues of traceability of IP addresses in a cloud computing context, on
threats to national security associated with cyber attacks on critical infrastructures, and on
dramatic forms of cyber criminality such as child pornography. The citizen is taken into
account, but as the victim of crimes such as identity theft or botnet attacks, not as a bearer
of rights, including the right to data protection and to privacy.

This note aims at reverting this trend and examines the consequences of putting the
individual at the centre of the system of triangular diplomacy at play over the question of
cloud computing, between national authorities of the country where s/he resides, the
companies providing cloud computing infrastructures, platforms and services, and the
international stage where other national governments and transnational bodies such as the
EU define the stakes involved in the global regulation of an Internet redefined by cloud
computing innovations.

Assessing these innovations is important in order to avoid both sceptical and catastrophic
framings of cloud computing. For the sceptics, cloud computing has brought no particular
change. For the catastrophists, cloud computing is a radically new phenomenon that calls
for more control over the Internet, viewed as a "Far West" with outlaw, but without a
proper sheriff. As this note will argue, the terminology of "the cloud" in itself comes from
advertisement, and reflects an effort at "branding" distributed parallel computation
services. But "the cloud" does not float in the air and is not purely virtual. It involves an

12

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

infrastructure of data centres that is thoroughly territorialised, within which data moves at
high speed and can neither be traced nor localised easily. Cloud computing thus creates a
series of challenges tied to the means of countering attacks, to the difficulties for law
enforcement agencies to trace the activities of criminals, ad to the quasi-impossibility for
EU citizens to know exactly what has been done with their personal data when it is
processed by companies either using or providing cloud services. Existing legal protections,
such as Safe Harbour for US-based companies, are limited. They rest on the good will of
third parties and are not tied to real enforcement powers. This also holds true when the
data (whether personal or anonymised) of EU citizens is used for the purpose of preventing
illegal acts.

1.1.	Cloud computing technologies

Cloud computing can be defined in general terms as the distributed processing of data on
remotely located computers accessed through the Internet1. To some extent, cloud
computing is not really a new technology, but a new business model for companies such as
Amazon, Google or Microsoft to commoditise the extraneous capacities of their data
centres. The more advanced forms depend on new software techniques that allow
simultaneous processing of data, distributed automatically over massively parallel
hardware.

Cloud computing is geographically distributed across data centres. A data centre is a
warehouse-sized building equipped with backup power supplies and air conditioning,
housing racks containing tens of thousands of identical circuit boards (called "blades" -
each containing a complete powerful computer) and disk drives. The blades and disks are
all connected to high speed networking cables, and the programs to be run are
orchestrated by an underlying "fabric" of software managing the available resources. While
some of these data centres can be located2, a consolidated map of all of them is currently
not available.

There is arguably not a single cloud but several. The cloud can firstly be understood in
terms of the services provided through it. Most studies distinguish between at least three
technical varieties of cloud computing in this regard:

1.	Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS): the provision of computing and storage
resources for remote control over the Internet. These resources usually are "virtual"
machines, simulations of machines in software which share the resources of many
physical machines efficiently.

2.	Software-as-a-Service (SaaS): the provision of software applications (e.g. for word
processing or spreadsheets), running on server computers in a datacentre, to
remote users through their local computer acting as a terminal.

3.	Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS): a Cloud operating system designed to distribute the
dynamically varying demand for resources automatically over hundreds or
thousands of machines, without needing to alter the code of programs written for
that platform.

1 See, inter alia, European Commission (2012(e)), Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in Europe,
COM(2012) 529 final.

2See	e.g.:	http://www.google.com/about/datacenters/inside/locations/	or

http://www.zdnet.com/blog/microsoft/where-in-the-world-are-microsofts-datacenters/5700.

13

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Each of these forms of cloud computing allow customers to be billed only for the resources
they use, and more resources can be allocated "elastically" up to the aggregate capacity of
the available data centres. Services such as Google Search or Facebook social networking
are not examples of cloud computing as such, but are applications built on a foundation of
PaaS architecture. Office365 is an example of SaaS. Services offering the hosting of virtual
machines running the user's choice of operating system are an example of IaaS. A further
distinction can be made between public clouds which involve the provision of
IaaS/SaaS/PaaS to many customers sharing the processing power of a machine in a data
centre, contrasted, and private clouds which are used only by a single customer (or a
restricted group) usually for security reasons.

Although the application software must be written from scratch in special languages, only
PaaS is capable of the true "elastic" scaling of demand from one machine to many
thousands. By contrast, IaaS is arguably not "real" cloud computing at all, in that the only
difference from traditional means of leasing computing power at a distance is that the
machines are virtual. So far, major commercial PaaS platforms are offered only by US
companies. Most cloud providers in the EU are actually reselling services controlled and
designed in the US, and their privacy policies state that data will be exported to the US.

1.2.	Cloud computing, cybercrime and privacy: what are the
challenges?

If to some degree cloud computing is not a genuinely new technology, it does nonetheless
hold the potential for presenting original challenges to EU policies in the field of information
society as well as justice and home affairs. The growing reliance on cloud computing
contributes to the growth of trans-border flows of data, not only within the EU, but also
with third countries and particularly the United States. Cloud computing is usually
envisaged as a challenge to the global regulation of the Internet. In the field of security,
these concerns involve the questions of (information) infrastructure protection on the one
hand, of the fight against crime on the other, as well as defence considerations linked with
possibilities of cyber-spying and cyber-sabotage. These are certainly important stakes, but
they fall mostly under the responsibility of Member States. Given that this study focuses on
the EU, we will in the following pages concentrate on the issues related to the protection of
EU citizens against crime, and to the guarantee of his fundamental freedoms and rights in
the context of an increasingly cloud-intensive Internet.

The 'challenge of challenges', so to speak, is therefore to clarify what it is that EU
bodies should be predominantly concerned with in the first place. This is a
particularly timely discussion, given the recent creation of a European Cybercrime Centre
(EC3) within the European Police Office EUROPOL, and the forthcoming adoption of an EU
Cybersecurity strategy by the European Commission (foreseen December 2012 at the time
of writing). Should the focus be on combating online criminality (i.e. cybercrime) in order to
protect the data of EU citizens from fraudsters using 'the cloud' as an asset or a target? Is
the main concern tied to the loss of sovereignty resulting from cyber-sabotage and cyber-
spying and tensions among states? Or should the emphasis be placed on providing legal
certainty in jurisdiction-spanning transfers of data involving a multiplicity of data controllers
and processors? Ultimately, this raises the question of who is most affected by online
developments among companies, states and individuals. As discussed in the study, it is
certainly the case that the most pressing challenge, which is still not examined and
recognised as such, lies with the provision of legal certainty to EU citizens regarding their
right to data protection and their right to privacy.

14

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

The question of priorities associated with the challenge of privacy is thus central, and is the
main issue discussed in this study. More specifically:

•	Section 2 provides an overview of the current knowledge on risks arising from
the growing reliance on cloud computing, continuing with a brief survey of the
EU policy and operational framework in this regard.

•	Section 3 builds on the conclusions of this overview to suggest that the main
concern might not lie specifically or exclusively in dealing with fraudsters. Cloud
computing brings into focus the triangular diplomacy at play between
states, companies and the inter-state system in the global regulation of the
Internet. The unfolding of this triangular diplomacy puts into question the degree
to which the protection of individuals is central in current discussions of cloud
computing. In this regard, it appears that the provision of the best legal and
technical guarantees to EU citizens regarding their data is the most central and
pressing challenge.

•	Section 4 develops a legal perspective on this discussion. Cloud computing and
cybercrime pose legal challenges to fundamental legal concepts in the fragmented
EU legislative framework. Firstly, definitional uncertainties relate to the Member
States' discretion to establish jurisdiction, and this creates legal uncertainty for the
individual as regards the applicable law. Secondly, definitional uncertainties relate to
the multiple definitions of adequacy as regards data transfers to third countries, and
this creates legal uncertainty for the individual as regards the definition of 'adequate
data protection standards'. This is exacerbated by the lack of a concept of
cybercrime within the EU, which creates even more legal uncertainty for the
individual as regards the justification of lower data protection standards for
cybercrime.

•	Section 5, finally, outlines several key recommendations for current and upcoming
EU activities with regard cloud computing.

2.	CLOUD COMPUTING, CYBERCRIME, PRIVACY: THE EU
FRAMEWORK

KEY FINDINGS

•	Risks associated with cloud computing are an exacerbation of traditional information
security concerns. The risk faced by individuals using cloud services is the most
central.

•	There is considerable disagreement over the risks that can actually be attributed to
cybercrime. Some experts consider that companies are most at risk and face the
steepest costs, while others argue convincingly that average citizens are the most
concerned.

•	The various components of the EU's cybercrime policy framework currently fall
under the responsibility of different services and involve different groups of experts
and 'stakeholders'. This contributes to unclear priorities and possible misallocation of
resources.

15

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

•	The Commission's decision to locate the EC3 within EUROPOL raises the question of
the respective roles of ENISA and EUROPOL.

•	The way in which the Commission envisages the role of EC3 perpetuates the habit of
providing a list of activities, blurring priorities and a sense of direction, and lacking a
reliable assessment of the resources that are required to meet agreed goals.

"The advanced methods discovered in Operation High Roller show fraudsters moving
toward cloud-based servers with multi-faceted automation in a global fraud campaign"

(David Marcus, director of security research for McAfee Labs - June 2012).

In a white paper published in June 20123, McAfee and Guardian Analytics described what
supposedly exemplified cybercrime moving to the cloud. "Operation High Roller" designates
a series of highly sophisticated campaigns designed to take money out of bank accounts in
Europe, the U.S. and South America through automated transfers. If the first stage of the
fraud can be seen as "traditional" (phishing e-mail, use of a Trojan - in this case Zeus or
SpyEye), the final stage was allegedly more innovative, the fraudsters operating malware
from a server in the cloud. The McAfee/Guardian Analytics white paper concluded by
stressing new opportunities for criminals arising from "the cloud".

The latest Europol Report dedicated to cybercrime (iOCTA - 2011) echoes these concerns.
It states that the process of outsourcing data storage to third parties (as a cost-saving
option and a way of remote access to data from any location) "poses both a threat to users
and a challenge to law enforcement. Data stored in the Cloud is not only accessible to all
authorized users, but also vulnerable to external attacks"4.

The fraud described in Operation High Roller indeed shows how the cloud can be used for
illicit purposes. It also emphasizes the high level of sophistication of the individuals who
planned it.

The 2002 Proposal for a Council Framework Decision on attacks against information
systems, in its §28 distinguishes between 'criminal attack (threat) to computer
infrastructure' and 'computer-assisted crime (threat)':

First, threats to computer infrastructures, which concern operations to disrupt,
deny, degrade or destroy information resident in computers and computer networks,
or the computer and networks themselves. Secondly, computer-assisted threats,
which concern malicious activities, such as fraud, money laundering, child
pornography, infringement to intellectual property rights and drug trafficking, which
are facilitated by the use of a computer.

However, while the cloud certainly offers new possibilities for criminals and can be a
facilitator for a wide range of criminal activities, to single out cloud computing as a new
type of cybercrime is problematic, and this section emphasises the following:

• First, cloud technologies are a means to commit crime, much like other
computer-related technologies (i.e. viruses, phishing, botnets, malware, etc.).

3	Marcus, D. and Sherstobitoff, R. (2012), Dissecting Operation High Roller, White Paper, June 2012.

4	EUROPOL (2011), Threat Assessment Report (Abridged), Internet Facilitated organised Crime - iOCTA, January

2011, p.10.

16

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

• Second, if cloud technologies can be seen as a key challenge for all online data
storage users, major risks are not necessarily coming from fraudsters.

2.1.	What is at risk with the cloud?

Among the various reports tabled by EU institutions as well as other public or private
bodies in recent years on cloud computing, cybercrime is not particularly singled out as a
specific concern. Out of the ten 'top security risks' listed by the European network and
information security agency ENISA in a recent report on the cloud5, only two, possibly three
can be potentially related to criminal activities. This includes the possibility of attacks
launched on isolation mechanisms (since cloud computing is based on multi-tenancy and
shared resources, isolation of tenant 'spaces' is central), the compromising of management
interfaces which would give attackers access to a potentially greater set of resources than
in traditional, networked computing, and the possibility of a so-called 'malicious insider'
within a cloud service provider. These risks are arguably an exacerbation of
traditional information security concerns rather than something brought about
exclusively by cloud computing. The same can be said about the above mentioned
Operation High Roller, where the fraud was based on a denial-of-service attack - DoS
attack, i.e. an attempt to make a machine or network resource unavailable to its intended
users that has nothing specific to the cloud.

By contrast, the central point emphasised in the ENISA report is the risk faced by
customers if the cloud provider makes improper use and/or mismanages the data

contained in its data centres. One of the main challenges raised by cloud computing are
those of privacy and trust and not only security, even though the quality of the protection
measures put in place is of course central. Cloud-computing infrastructure is indeed today
almost exclusively owned by private companies, and represents a significant and growing
part of the Internet. Thus, the economic aspects and commercial interests should not be
underestimated. The cloud services provided by well-known US based company Amazon
(under the label Amazon Web Services, EWS), for instance, is presumed to account for 1%
of all Internet consumer traffic6. This trend appears to be reinforced as the current
economic and financial crisis brings budgetary control into the spotlight, leading public
authorities to opt for outsourcing cloud computing to private entities, sometimes to the
detriment of other initiatives. A good example is the June 2012 decision by US space
agency NASA to shift part of its infrastructure to the aforementioned Amazon EWS to the
detriment of its efforts in the development of open-source cloud platform OpenStack, an
initiative it had founded with company Rackspace Hosting7.

The question, in this regard, is whether the focus on cloud computing from the
perspective of cybercrime is appropriate and in tune with the challenges raised
by cloud computing. As detailed in the following subsection, this is all the more stringent
as the current EU policy framework dealing with cybercrime is piecemeal, a situation that
follows in part from the development of two distinct perspectives, one pertaining to
network and information security and the other to law-enforcement.

5	European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) (2009(a)), Cloud computing: benefits, risks and
recommendations for information security, Heraklion, November 2009.

6	Based on estimates by US-based start-up Deepfield, see: Labovitz, C. (2012), 'How Big is Amazon's Cloud?',
18.3.2012, available from: http://www.deepfield.net/2012/04/how-big-is-amazons-cloud/, retrieved 20.8.2012.

7	See the announcement by NASA Chief Information Officer Linda Cureton, 'IT Reform at the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration', 8.6.2012, available from http://blogs.nasa.gov/cm/blog/NASA-CIO-
Blog/posts/post_1339205656611.html, retrieved 20.8.2012.

17

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

2.2.	Cloud computing and the EU legal, policy and operational
framework

2.2.1.	The problem with measuring cybercrime

The 2007 EU Commission's communication dedicated to computer-related crimes gives this
definition of cybercrime: "criminal acts committed using electronic communications
networks and information systems or against such networks and systems":

In practice, the term cyber crime is applied to three categories of criminal activities.
The first covers traditional forms of crime such as fraud or forgery, though in a
cyber crime context relates specifically to crimes committed over electronic
communication networks and information systems (hereafter: electronic networks).
The second concerns the publication of illegal content over electronic media (i.e.
child sexual abuse material or incitement to racial hatred). The third includes crimes
unique to electronic networks, i.e. attacks against information systems, denial of
service and hacking8.

As underlined by many scholars and experts, this definition of cybercrime is highly
problematic from a legal point of view. The lack of a concept of 'cybercrime' within the EU
has direct implications for the functioning of the proposed European Cybercrime Centre
(EC3) as part of EUROPOL9, and creates a larger degree of uncertainty for the individual as
regards lower data protection standards for 'cybercrime' and whether this differs from other
crimes such as 'computer crime' and/or other 'serious crimes'. Furthermore, the scope of
this definition, as well as the three types of crime presented (internet facilitating various
types of crimes, illegal use of online data, crimes specific to electronic networks) means
that a significant proportion of criminal activities fall, in one way or another, under the
heading of cybercrime.

As a consequence, attempts to measure the cost of cybercrime should be
considered with caution, all the more since available figures tend to be hotly disputed,
as the recent controversy over the Detica study in the United Kingdom illustrates. In
February 2011, the UK Cabinet Office commissioned Detica, a private company working in
the area of information intelligence with governments and commercial customers, to work
jointly with the UK Office of Cyber Security and Information Assurance (OCSIA)10 to assess
the costs of cybercrime to the British economy. The Detica study focused on three
phenomena:

1.	identity theft and online scams affecting UK citizens;

2.	IP theft, industrial espionage and extortion targeted at UK businesses;

3.	Fiscal fraud committed against the Government.

It calculated the magnitude of the costs of cyber crime using three-point estimates (worst-
case, most-likely case and best-case scenarios), focusing in particular on IP theft and
industrial espionage and its effect on the different industry sectors. According to the study's
most-likely scenario, the cost of cybercrime to the UK amounted to £27bn per annum. A

8	European Commission (2007), Communication to the European Parliament, the Council and the Committee of the
Regions - Towards a general policy on the fight against cyber crime, SEC(2007) 641, SEC(2007) 642,
COM/2007/0267 final, Brussels, 22.5.2007.

9	European Commission (2012(d)), Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European
Parliament Tackling Crime in our Digital Age: Establishing a European Cybercrime Centre, COM(2012) 140 final,
Brussels, 28.03.2012, p. 7.

10	The OCSIA supports the UK Minister for the Cabinet Office and the National Security Council in determining
priorities in relation to securing cyberspace. The unit provides strategic direction and coordinates action relating to
enhancing cyber security and information assurance in the UK.

18

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

significant proportion of this cost comes from the theft of IP from UK businesses, which
they estimate at £9.2bn per annum.

These figures have been met with skepticism, to the extent that an alternative study was
subsequently commissioned, this time by the UK ministry of Defence. Undertaken by four
independent researchers, the second study built on a report initially commissioned in 2008
by ENISA on 'Security Economics and the Single Market'11. The report submitted to ENISA
analysed the statistics available at the time, their shortcomings, and the ways in which
they could lead to incorrect policy decisions. One of the element emphasized in this study
was the lack of hard data about information security failures, as many of the available
statistics are not only poor but are collected by parties such as security vendors or law
enforcement agencies that have a vested interest in under- or over-reporting.

The report commissioned by the UK ministry of Defence, entitled 'Measuring the Cost of
Cybercrime'12, further identified which figures are actually known, what can reasonably be
estimated and what can only be guessed. According to the data gathered and analysed, it
came to the following conclusions13:

1.	Traditional frauds such as tax and welfare fraud cost citizens a few hundred
pounds/euros/dollars a year. With such crimes, the costs of defence - i.e. the
monetary equivalent of prevention - are much less than the amounts stolen.

2.	Transitional frauds such as payment card fraud cost citizens a few tens of
pounds/euros/dollars a year. Online payment card fraud, for example, typically runs
at 30 basis points, or 0.3% of the turnover of e-commerce firms. Defence costs are
broadly comparable with actual losses, but the indirect costs of business foregone
because of the fear of fraud, both by consumers and by merchants, are several
times higher.

3.	The new cyber-frauds such as fake antivirus net their perpetrators relatively small
sums, with common scams pulling in tens of cents/pence per year per head. In
total, the earnings of cyber-fraudsters might amount to a couple of dollars per
citizen per year. But the indirect costs and defence costs are very substantial, at
least ten times that. The cleanup costs faced by users (whether personal or
corporate) are the largest single component; owners of infected PCs can spend
hundreds of dollars, while the average cost to each of us as citizens runs in the low
tens of dollars per year. The costs of antivirus (to both individuals and businesses)
and the cost of patching (mostly to businesses) are also significant at a few dollars a
year each.

The report concludes that despite the fact that cybercrimes are global and have
strong externalities, the figures suggest that less funding should be allocated to
measures anticipating cybercrime (on antivirus, firewalls, etc.) and more to
reactive measures: that is to "the prosaic business of hunting down cyber-criminals and
throwing them in jail". Another element usefully recalled in the report is the mere fact that
the misallocation of resources associated with cybercrime results more from
economic and political factors than from behavioral ones and that "previous studies
of cybercrime have tended to study quite different things and were often written by
organisations (such as vendors, police agencies or music industry lawyers) with an obvious
'agenda'"14.

11	Anderson, R., Bohme, R., Clayton, R., Moore, T. (2008), Security Economics and the Single Market, 2008.

12	Anderson, R., Barton, C., Bohme, R. et al (2012), Measuring the Cost of Cybercrime, Workshop on the
Economics of Information Security, June 2012.

13	Ibid, Conclusions of the study, p.25

14	Ibid, p.2

19

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

This element in particular contrasts with the conclusions of the Detica report, which
presents business as facing the steepest costs and encourages more governmental funding
in the area of prevention and improvement of cyber security. One should keep in mind that
Detica is part of BAE Systems, a global defence and security company, with activities in the
field of cybersecurity, risk management and compliance. As underlined in the UK ministry
of Defence report, the long-term winners of the fight against cybercrime as it is now
steered may well be firms such as BAE Systems, but also Google and Microsoft as people
are driven to webmail services with good spam protection. One could argue here that the
need to fight cybercrime in a proactive manner is an argument deployed by
industry, largely for commercial purposes.

This is all the more important as the reports of EU bodies draw significantly on the
expertise provided by private companies. EUROPOL's 2011 iOCTA report states for instance
that "whilst the value of the cybercriminal economy as a whole is not yet known, one
recent estimate of global corporate losses stands at approximately $1 trillion per year"
(p.5). This figure is derived from a report by antivirus software provider McAfee on
"Unsecured Economies: Protecting Vital Information" released at the World Economic
Forum annual meeting in Davos in 2009. To avoid the risk of inflation in assessments of
cybercrime, it seems that legal clarity and precision are important: the iOCTA report
describes in length "internet facilitated organised crime", without clarifying what cybercrime
covers and does not cover. In the meantime, iOCTA remains conservative for what
concerns cloud computing. Echoing the findings of the 2009 ENISA risk assessment of the
cloud, iOCTA actually implies that cybercrime is less central than the customer-
provider relationships:

whilst corporate owned servers are evidently themselves subject to hacking, the
lack of direct control entailed by cloud computing raises concerns about whether
security measures will be properly enforced by the storage provider, or understood
by the data owner or customer. In the cloud computing scenario, for example, the
personal and financial data of retail customers could be stored on the Internet by a
third party without that customer's knowledge, and without the direct control of the
organisation who has processed that data. The key to cloud computing's success
and long-term uptake will be whether the convenience of remote access will be
matched by confidence in its security provisions, (p.10)

There is no doubt that computer-related crimes are serious matters affecting citizens as
well as public infrastructures and private businesses. The question, however, is
whether the priority lies in a technological build-up and proactive measures, or in
the pursuit of traditional criminal justice aims. Section 4 below outlines in this regard
the critical importance of having legal certainty on the ownership over one's data, and thus
the importance of consent of the customers. With regard risks of financial fraud, botnets,
hacking, phishing, spamming, the new opportunities offered by the cloud, are also real.
One should however not lose sight of what is at stake in the emphasis placed on security
provisions related to the cloud, and whose interests are thereby promoted. Moreover, the
lack of legal certainly that surrounds the concept of cybercrime, as well as the lack of
certainty when it comes to its costs, raises concerns towards the EU policy framework in
the field.

2.2.2.	The EU legal and policy framework

The EU legal and policy framework regarding cybercrime, fundamental freedoms and rights

20

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

including the right to privacy has already been described in detail elsewhere15. The
principal, general-purpose legal instrument in this area remains the 2001 Council
of Europe Convention on Cybercrime (ETS 185). In addition, and although a number
of policy documents have sought to provide a strategic overview of EU measures - most
recently the European Commission's communication on 'Tackling crime in our digital age' -
16, there is no overall policy orientation on the issue. It remains to be seen whether the
upcoming EU strategy on cybersecurity, announced in May 2012, will provide such a
framework.

Criminal law measures adopted through the EU on the question of cybercrime have focused
most substantively on the question of attacks on information systems. The relevant
instrument here is Council Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA of 24 February 2005 on
attacks against information systems17. The implementation of this Decision was reviewed in
July 2008, with the Commission report highlighting the need for an update in light of the
increase of 'botnet'-based attacks18. In September 2010, the Commission published a
proposal for a directive repealing Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA, which is currently
awaiting Parliament first reading19. References to cyber-crime can also be found in criminal
law instruments targeting the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography.
Measures listed in Council Framework Decision 2004/68/JHA target both online and offline
conducts20. The Framework Decision has been replaced by Directive 2011/92/EU of 13
December 2011, which establishes minimum common rules among Member States (beyond
the objective of approximation contained in the Framework Directive), incorporates
elements from the relevant Council of Europe Convention adopted in 2007 (ETS 201), and
includes elements regarding new criminal offences in the IT environment21. Criminal law
measures related to cybercrime and adopted through the EU, finally, are also said to
include the 'online' components of other offences22. This comprises terrorism, as provided
for by Council Framework Decision 2008/919/JHA23 as well as acts of racism and
xenophobia24.

The question of cybercrime is also considered in the context of EU measures related to
network and information security (NIS) and critical information infrastructure protection
(CIIP). NIS and cyber-crime (understood as 'computer-related crime') were initially
considered within the same framework, as the Commission's first 'cybercrime
communication' of January 2001 illustrates25. As early as June 2001 however, the 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25

15	Peers, S. (2009), Strengthening Security and Fundamental Freedoms on the Internet - An EU Policy on the
Fight Against Cybercrime, PE 408.335, European Parliament, Brussels, January 2009.

16	European Commission (2012(d)).

17	Council of the EU (2005), Council Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA of 24 February 2005 on attacks against
information systems, OJ L 69/67, 16.3.2005.

18	European Commission (2008), Report from the Commission to the Council based on Article 12 of the Council
Framework Decision of 24 February 2005 on attacks against information systems, COM(2008) 448 final, Brussels,
14.7.2008.

19	European Commission (2010(b)), Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on
attacks against information systems and repealing Council Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA, COM(2010) 517
final, 30.9.2010.

20	Council of the EU (2004), Council Framework Decision 2004/68/JHA of 22 December 2003 on combating the
sexual exploitation of children and child pornography, OJ L 13/44, 20.1.2004.

21	European Parliament and Council of the EU (2011), Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 13 December 2011 on combating the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child
pornography, and replacing Council Framework Decision 2004/68/JHA, OJ L 335/1, 17.12.2011.

22	For a summary see Peers, S., op.cit.

23	Council of the EU (2008(b)), Council Framework Decision 2008/919/JHA of 28 November 2008 amending
Framework Decision 2002/475/JHA on combating terrorism, OJ L 330/21, 9.12.2008.

24	Council of the EU (2008(a)), Council Framework Decision 2008/913/JHA of 28 November 2008 on combating
certain forms and expressions of racism and xenophobia by means of criminal law, OJ L 328/55, 6.12.2008.

25	European Commission (2001(a)), Creating a Safe Information Society by Improving the Security of Information
Infrastructures and Combating Computer-related Crime, COM(2000) 890 final, Brussels, 26.1.2001.

21

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Commission's DG INFSO tabled a separate communication on 'network and information
security'26 27. The document states in particular that 'the proposed policy measures [...] have
to be seen in the context of the existing telecommunications, data protection and cyber-
crime policies [...][and] will provide the missing link in this policy framework'. The
communication envisaged this framework through Figure 1 below.

Figure 1: The relation between NIS, cybercrime and data protection seen by DG
INFSO27

The focus of NIS activities is 'the ability of a network or an information system to resist, at
a given level of confidence, accidental events or malicious action'28. Attention is thus
directed to the conditions through which such confidence can be achieved and guaranteed.
The original purpose of the ENISA, initially established in 200429 was to foster such
conditions. NIS activities sponsored through the focus of a 'secure information society' have
since been relabelled as part of the EU's developing European Programme for Critical
Infrastructure Protection (EPCIP) steered in the framework of the area of freedom, security
and justice30. While NIS persists as a policy identifier, a number of activities related to it
are now undertaken as part of the so-called CIIP framework31.

As suggested so far, then, the various components of the EU's cybercrime policy
framework fall under the responsibility of different services and involve different
groups of experts and 'stakeholders'. The Commission's first 'cybercrime
communication' of January 2001 was a joint endeavour between the institution's directorate
generals in charge of information society (DG INFSO, now CONNECT) and justice and home
affairs (DG JHA/JLS/HOME). The 2001 Commission communication on network and
information security was steered only by the former. In 2006-2007, DG INFSO led the

26	European Commission (2001(b)), Network and Information Security: Proposal for a European Policy Approach,
COM(2001) 298 final, Brussels, 6.6.2001.

27	Ibid, p. 3.

28	European Commission (2001(b)), p. 3.

29	European Parliament and Council of the EU (2004), Regulation (EC) No 464/2004 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 10 March 2004 establishing the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA),
OJ L 77/1, 13.3.2004.

30	European Commission (2006), A strategy for a Secure Information Society - "Dialogue, partnership and
empowerment", COM(2006) 251 final, Brussels, 31.5.2006. On EPCIP, see: European Commission (2005), Green
Paper on a European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection, COM(2005) 576 final, Brussels, 17.11.2005.

31	European Commission (2009), Critical Infrastructure Protection - Protecting Europe from large-scale cyber-
attacks and disruptions: enhancing preparedness, security and resilience, COM(2009) 149 final, Brussels,
30.3.2009; and more recently: European Commission (2011), Critical Information Infrastructure Protection -
Achievements and next steps: towards global cyber-security, COM(2011) 163 final, Brussels, 31.3.2011.

22

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

drafting of the Commission communication on a strategy for a secure information society32
while DG JLS tabled the communication on a general EU policy on cybercrime33. Annex 1
provides a chronological overview of the main initiatives (strategic documents and
legislative proposals) related to the question of cybercrime in the EU framework,
associating them with the 'lead' Commission services in charge as well as the responsible
committee in the European Parliament.

Having different agencies, bodies or services taking the 'lead' or intervening on the issue of
cybercrime also entails that different policy outlooks are generated. Efforts to integrate
these different outlooks have so far mostly taken the form of consolidated lists of
actions to be undertaken. A good example of this is the so-called "Pillar III" of the Digital
Agenda for Europe initiative on "Trust and security" (Action 28 to 41)34 that encompasses
priorities ranging from the reinforcement of NIS policies to the establishment of Computer
Emergency Response Teams (CERTs), and including measures for the fight against
cybercrime, trust-building or preparedness against cyber-attacks. The question is whether
such a list-based approach should be upheld. What is the priority, and how should
resources be allocated given the limited and contested available knowledge on
cybercrime? Based on the example of the Digital Agenda actions, there seems to be at
least three policy domains involved: infrastructure protection, criminal justice, and defence.
As shown so far, EU activities have developed primarily in the first two domains. Since
these entail very different perspectives on the information society and how security should
be pursued in this context, it might be counter-productive for the Commission to
provide a long list of priorities without a proper estimate, for each of them, of
personnel and equipment costs, of their feasibility, and without determining
which agency is best placed to be in charge (see below, 2.2.3.). The objective should
rather be to define precisely what are the aims of the EU in each policy domain and outline
clearly the boundaries between them. Giving priority to the individual, her or his
fundamental rights and freedoms as the core objective of the Union's policy would
furthermore give it a sense of direction. As we will suggest in Section 3 below, in the
current "triangular" configuration of policies related to cloud computing, the individual
indeed tends to disappear in favour of a focus on the global regulation of the Internet.
Reasserting this priority would give EU policies in this area a clear driving principle, in line
with the objectives of the Treaties. It is also important given the current development of
the EU operational framework in the field of cybercrime.

2.2.3.	The EU operational framework in the field of cybercrime

The EU operational framework in the field of cybercrime consists mainly of two sets of
measures. Cybercrime is approached through NIS, in relation with the establishment of
ENISA, and in the context of EUROPOL's activities in the field of law-enforcement.

ENISA was established in 2004 and is based in Heraklion in Greece. ENISA was set up as a
response to cyber security issues faced by the European Union. ENISA, however, is not a
JHA body (it contributes to the EU's information society policies) and does not operate
directly in the field of law-enforcement. The EU ISS adopted in 2010 failed in this respect to
clarify ENISA's future role in the area of internal security, especially with regard
cybercrime. In its memorandum submitted to the House of Lords Sub-Committee dedicated
to the EU ISS, ENISA defined its contribution to the ISS by an application of proven risk
management techniques (identification of information security risks, global risk
management and risk assessment, emerging threats and dissemination of good practices

32	European Commission (2006).

33	European Commission (2007).

34	See details on the DAE's website at: http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/our-targets/pillar-iii-trust-security.

23

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

for risk Management and IT Contingency). In particular, the ENISA Work Programme 2011
included efforts to enhance European cooperation to generate awareness about Networks
and information Security, disseminate security relevant information and to assist Member
States in coordinating these activities internationally. ENISA had a mandate that was due
to expire in March 2012. The EP and the Council recently decide to extend ENISA's
mandate to 13th September 2013, which will allow time for debate on how to shape the
Agency to meet future needs and challenges in network and information security. As
highlighted in a EP report dedicated to the role and future of ENISA,35 a possible extension
of ENISA's mandate is foreseen in the area of cybercrime. In his speech given at the
European parliament in May 2011, ENISA's Director stated the following:

ENISA acknowledges the importance of the fight against cybercrime as well as the
need for a strong collaboration between Computer Emergency Response Teams
(CERTs) and law enforcement because we need the CERTs in the fight against
cyber-crime. The important role of ENISA is to provide an interface between Law
Enforcement and the cyber security community36.

Operational EU law-enforcement measures on cybercrime, on the other hand, have been
channelled through EUROPOL.37 Through its Analysis Work Files (AWFs) information system
in particular, the agency has conducted analysis activities38:

1.	on several cybercrime issues including Internet and ICT related criminal activities
falling under Articles 2-8 of the 2001 Cybercrime Convention (AWF/Focal point
CYBORG), on payment card fraud (AWF/Focal point TERMINAL), and on sexual
exploitation of children through the Internet (AWF/Focal point TWINS);

2.	on so-called "cybercrime-related" issues, including counterfeiting and product piracy
(AWF/Focal point COPY), suspicious financial transactions (AWF/Focal point
SUSTRANS) and Islamist terrorism propaganda on the Internet (AWF/Focal point
CHECK THE WEB).

These activities have recently been redeployed following the decision to establish a
European Cybercrime Centre in EUROPOL. The Commission announced its intention to
establish such a structure in the 'EU Internal Security Strategy in Action'39 adopted on 22
November 2010. It commissioned a feasibility study funded under the ISEC programme,
which was delivered by RAND EUROPE in the early weeks of 2012. The study served as the
basis of the Communication on a European Cybercrime Centre, released in March 201240.
According to this document, the centre is expected to start operations in January 2013 and
is entrusted with the following tasks:

-	Act as a European focal point in fighting cybercrime.

-	Prevent cybercrimes affecting e-banking and online booking activities, thus
increasing e-consumers trust

35	Scott Marcus, J. et al. (2011), The role of ENISA in contributing to a coherent and enhanced structure of
network and information security in the EU and internationally, Brussels: European Parliament, PE464.432.

36	Helmbrecht, U., (2011), ENISA today and in the future, Committee on Industry, Research and Energy, Mini-
Hearing on ENISA, Brussels: European Parliament.

37	In the course of researching for this note, the authors have been contacted by EUROPOL Assistant Director and
Head of EC3 Troels Oerting. Two researchers (Didier Bigo and Julien Jeandesboz) visited EUROPOL on 24.10.2012
and had an extensive discussion with Mr. Oerting and members of his team, as well as with Senior Advisor to
EUROPOL's Data Protection Office Jan Ellermann. The following points draw partly from the results of this visit.

38	A full overview of EUROPOL's cybercrime activities, including issues related to data protection, can be found in
Drewer, D. and Ellermann, J., (2012), 'EUROPOL's data protection framework as an asset in the fight against
cybercrime', ERA Forum: Journal of the Academy of European Law, forthcoming.

39	European Commission, EU Internal Security Strategy in Action, IP/10/1535 and MEMO/10/598.

40	European Commission (2012(d)).

24

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

-	Protect social network profiles from e-crime infiltration and help the fight against
online identity theft

-	Focus on cybercrimes which cause serious harm to their victims, such as online child
sexual exploitation

-	Focus on cyber-attacks affecting critical infrastructure and information systems in
the Union

-	Warn EU Member States of major cybercrime threats and alert them of weaknesses
in their online defences.

-	Identify organised cyber-criminal networks and prominent offenders in cyberspace.

-	Provide operational support in concrete investigations, be it with forensic assistance
or by helping to set up cybercrime Joint Investigation Teams.

-	Serve as a knowledge base for national police in the Member States

-	Pool European cybercrime expertise and training efforts

To achieve its tasks, the Centre is expected to fuse information from open sources, private
industry, police and academia, and will serve as a platform for European cybercrime
investigators.

The way in which the European Commission envisages the role of EC3 calls for a number of
observations. Firstly, it perpetuates the habit of providing a consolidated list of
activities we have discussed above in relation to the Digital Agenda for Europe. The tasks
allocated to EC3 lack a clear hierarchy of priorities and a sense of direction. It seems that
the real added value of a cybercrime centre placed in Europol would be to establish a
specific team of specialised law enforcement officers, concerned with and aware of the
complexity of the tasks involved in finding out criminals through a moderately regulated
Internet and with the possibilities offered by cloud computing. Such a measure might also
give assurances to citizens that something is being done and that criminal activities will be
investigated. In the meantime, other tasks such as critical infrastructure protection
are beyond the scope of EC3. The same holds true for the preventive monitoring
of online activities of the kind supported by private Internet security companies,
or conducted by Member State intelligence services (see in this respect the annex
featuring the list of priorities provided by the current head of the EC3).

Secondly, it does not consistently address the issues of resources allocated to the
functioning of EC3, given the wide scope of the centre's remit. The communication
specifies that the estimates provided by the RAND Europe study "will need to be further
assessed [...] to be coherent with the overall staffing and budgetary requirements for
agencies in the 2013 budget and the next Multiannual Financial Framework" 41. This point
was at the centre of the discussion during the meeting arrange with the EC3 team at
EUROPOL for the purpose of this study. The credibility of the new centre requires that the
means are adequate to the envisaged tasks. It seems preferable to have a more precise
scope of activities, focusing exclusively on crime, and to be effective in this respect. This
implies that the European Commission needs to rethink the elements contained in its
communication. The document does not provide a sense of the repartition of tasks
between EU bodies, taking into account the differences between NIS and law-
enforcement policies discussed previously. The Commission's decision to locate the
cybercrime centre within EUROPOL raises the question of the place and role of ENISA. The
list of tasks allocated to the EC3, typically, mentions the "focus on cyber-attacks affecting

41	Ibid, p. 6.

25

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

critical infrastructure and information systems", an area that falls under ENISA's remit, but
which also relates to the scope of activities usually undertaken by Member States' defence
and intelligence bodies (the fight against cyber-spying and cyber-sabotage). Does this
mean that the Commission foresees EUROPOL as the future EU lead agency in "all
things cyber"? In the current situation, this holistic outlook contrasts with the envisaged
remit of EC3 within Europol, which is much more limited. EC3 officials would directly take
over the AWF/Focal points CYBORG, TERMINAL and TWINS, and concentrate on the
establishment of a fusion centre as a priority.

Thirdly, and more importantly, the question of who will be in charge of data
protection and fundamental rights for the citizens whose data is processed in a
context of cloud computing needs to be addressed. The legal implications of data
protection "in the cloud" and in relation with cybercrime-related, law-enforcement matters
will be addressed in more details in point 4.5 below. In any case, a new repartition of
tasks and cost assessment, different from that provided by the RAND Europe
feasibility study and better reflecting the overall priorities entailed by cloud
computing, would be useful.

The question of the respective roles of EUROPOL and ENISA can thus bear
significantly on the EU's policy with regard cloud computing. In this area, ENISA
holds a recognised expertise, as exemplified by its 2009 cloud security risk assessment42,
as well as by its proposed assurance framework governing information security risks in the
move towards cloud computing43. ENISA published in 2011 a report on security and
resilience in governmental clouds44. ENISA is also undertaking various activities in the
domain, including surveys on the security parameters, workshops with third parties such as
the Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS), a not-
for-profit consortium that drives the development, convergence and adoption of open
standards for the global information society as well as risk assessment studies on the
impact of a cloud service failure, and in which circumstances cloud services should be
considered "critical infrastructure". By contrast, EUROPOL has so far demonstrated little
interest in this issue. The "Cloud Computing" section of its 2011 iOCTA is fairly short, at
least in the abridged public version. It mentions that the move towards cloud computing
poses "both a threat to the individual and a challenge to law enforcement" (p.11) but does
not specify this threat or challenge further, only mentioning that cloud data is "vulnerable
to external attacks". On the basis of existing risk assessments, however, the degree to
which "external attacks" are the main concern arising from the growing reliance on cloud
computing is unclear. This observation goes some way to suggest that there is a need to
clarify the respective responsibilities of EUROPOL and ENISA with regard cloud computing,
if only to avoid duplication of activities and costs and ensure more effective undertakings.
Such a clarification, however, should be informed by a clear assessment of what is at stake
in the development of cloud computing. As the next section will show, cloud computing is
usually envisaged as a matter related to the global regulation of the Internet. In the
meantime however, and following the overview of risk assessments provided previously,
this issue shadows the question of the individual, her or his rights and freedoms.

42	Europen Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) (2009(a)).

43	Europen Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) (2009(b)), Cloud Computing Information Assurance
Framework, Heraklion, November 2009.

44	Europen Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) (2011), Security and resilience in governmental
clouds, Heraklion, January 2011.

26

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

3.	THE TRIANGULAR DIPLOMACY OF CLOUD COMPUTING
AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR THE INDIVIDUAL

KEY FINDINGS

•	The set of relations currently defining cloud computing technologies encompasses
negotiations and tensions between public authorities, private entities and public and
private authorities. In this set of relationships, data protection and privacy are often
objects of negotiations to the detriments of the individuals' rights.

•	If one places the individuals and her/his rights at the centre of the discussion, the
cybercrime dimension is but one of the pending issues. Where cloud computing is
possibly the most disruptive is in the fact that cloud computing breaks away from
the forty-year-old legal model for international data transfers.

•	In the field of cybercrime, the challenge of privacy in a cloud context is
underestimated, if not ignored. In most European fora dealing with cybercrime, Data
Protection laws appear to be very marginal in the agenda and inadequately
addressed to meet the challenges.

•	The question of privacy and data protection is furthermore challenged by
exceptional measures taken in the name of security and the fight against terrorism.
The US context is here particularly highlighting, both in the case of the Patriot Act
and in the case of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Amendment Act of 2008.
These elements have been totally neglected, despite very strong implications on EU
data sovereignty and the protection of its citizens' rights.

3.1.	The triangular diplomacy of cloud computing:	states,

companies and inter-state relations

In its 2012 'Sopot Memorandum' on cloud computing, the International Working Group on
Data Protection in Telecommunications outlined among other points that this technology 'is
boundless and transboundary' and that in this respect 'data processing has gone global'.45
One can question this assessment. The data transfers associated with cloud computing
involve multiple locales (data centres) distributed across different jurisdictions
and different private handlers, but they are not, from a technical, legal and political
point of view, global. Under present conditions, it is ultimately impossible for cloud
computing users to know exactly "where" their data is being held. From this point of view,
then, cloud computing is bound insofar as the data processing operations it involves take
place across different sovereign jurisdictions (see section 4.2), and bound again by
the relations it entails between a range of public and private authorities.

The most obvious of these relations is regulation, whereby public authorities establish rules
regarding the conduct of private entities in the provision of cloud-based services to private
citizens and companies. As recent discussions within the EU exemplify, private authorities
are intimately tied with the process of developing public regulations regarding cloud
computing. In November 2011 for instance, a group of industry representatives forwarded

45	International Working Group on Data Protection in Telecommunications, Working Paper on Cloud Computing -
Privacy and Data Protection issues - "Sopot Memorandum, 675.44.8, Sopot, 24.3.2012.

27

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

their recommendations on a 'European cloud computing strategy' to Vice-President of the
European Commission Neelie Kroes, outlining their views on the various challenges raised
by cloud computing, including on issues of privacy, trust and security46.

In the meantime, cloud-computing infrastructure is today almost exclusively owned by
companies. The cloud services provided by well-known US based company Amazon (under
the label Amazon Web Services, EWS), for instance, is presumed to account for 1% of all
Internet consumer traffic47. With the current economic and financial crisis bringing
budgetary control into the spotlight, furthermore, public authorities have tended to opt for
outsourcing cloud computing to private entities, sometimes to the detriment of other
initiatives. A good example is the June 2012 decision by US space agency NASA to shift
part of its infrastructure to the aforementioned Amazon EWS to the detriment of its efforts
in the development of open-source cloud platform OpenStack, an initiative it had founded
with company Rackspace Hosting48. Another aspect of the relations through which cloud
computing is bound, then, is the relation of the "public-private partnership" kind between
state authorities and companies. Also involved here is the commercial competition between
different cloud providers.

A third set of relations at stake in cloud computing lies with the inter-state/international
system, which involves transnational bodies such as the European Union itself, but also
conflicts between states. Over the past couple of years, high profile developments such as
the discovery of the Stuxnet, and more recently Flame cyber-attacks have emphasised the
risks associated with inter-state conflicts throughout our "information societies". By the
same token, the so-called "Megaupload" case reflects another aspect of inter-state
relations, in this case law-enforcement cooperation, but also the legal problems associated
with this kind of activities.

The set of relations currently defining cloud computing therefore encompasses negotiations
and tensions between public authorities (on the regulation of cloud computing, but also on
its use by administrations), between private entities (as they compete for providing cloud-
based services, or contract each other in this regard), and between public and private
authorities. To characterise these relations, we draw from the model developed by political
economist Susan Strange in an effort to understand the redefinition of relations between
transnational corporations and governmental authorities in the context of globalization,
which she coined as 'triangular diplomacy'49. Figure 2 below adapts Strange's argument to
the question of cloud computing. It outlines the predominant argument in discussions of
this issue, which relates cloud computing to the question of the global regulation of the
Internet.

46	E. Sweeney (rapporteur), Industry Recommendations to Vice President Neelie Kroes on the Orientation of a
European Cloud Computing Strategy, Brussels, 11.2011.

47	Based on estimates by US-based start-up Deepfield, see: Labovitz, C., op.cit.

48	See the announcement by NASA Chief Information Officer Linda Cureton, op.cit.

49	Strange, S. (1992), 'States, Firms and Diplomacy', International Affairs, 68(1): 1-15.

28

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

Figure 2: The triangular diplomacy of cloud computing from the point of view of
the global regulation of the Internet

With regard to cybercrime, predominant concerns related to cloud computing involve the
establishment of rules allowing for the association between persons and specific
IP addresses. This includes the avoidance of developments stemming both from relations
between states and companies and states and the inter-state system that would result in
the development of regional Internets undermining interoperability. What is lost in the
process, however, is the issue of the protection of the individual, which is as argued
previously identified as the most central risk in relation to cloud computing. Figure 2 raises
a different set of questions if instead of the global regulation of the Internet, one places the
individual at the core of policy concerns, as displayed in Figure 3 below.

29

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Figure 3: The triangular diplomacy of cloud computing from the point of view of
the individual

ndividua

inter-company competition

of conduct

diverging priorities between

htra-state

agencies, bodies, services

%

<1-

Companies

Inter-state

data protection shopping, establishment of data centres, tax avoidance

regulation, law enforcement

other institutions ¡e.g. EU)

self-regulation, e.g. codes

new information co d

war e.g. Iran)

Triangular diplomacy functions across the various policy domains involving cloud
computing, including law-enforcement. In this area, one concern widely echoed in
specialised news outlet over the past months is the fact that the largest providers of cloud
services are legally or physically located in the US, which makes the data processed
through their cloud liable to interception and seizure by US authorities. While cloud
computing has made data processing global, as argued by the Sopot Memorandum, it is
important to reiterate that jurisdiction still matters (see section 4.2). Where the
infrastructure underpinning cloud computing (i.e. data centres) is located, and
the legal framework that cloud service providers are subject to are key issues,
especially in a law-enforcement context where challenges to the right to data protection
and to privacy are particularly stringent. These concerns have been dealt with as a business
opportunity for some EU-based companies, which have advertised their services as safe
from any interception on the basis of the US PATRIOT Act50, and as a potential liability
which has seen other companies turning down cloud-based services from US providers -
such as UK-based defence company BAE Systems' reported decision to abstain from using
Microsoft's Office 365 cloud-based software suit in fear of industrial espionage51.

Figure 2 further highlights that the cybercrime dimension involved in the issue of cloud
computing is but one of the pending issues if one places the individual and his rights,

50	E.g. Baker, J. (2011), 'European cloud vendors cleaning up with data protection fears', Techworld, 5.12.2011,
available from http://news.techworld.com/security/3322757/europe-cloud-vendors-cleaning-up-with-data-
protection-fears/, retrieved 20.8.2012.

51	Whittaker, Z. (2012), 'Defense giant ditches Microsoft's cloud citing Patriot Act fears', ZDNet, available from
http://www.zdnet.com/blog/london/defense-giant-ditches-microsofts-cloud-citing-patriot-act-fears/1349,
retrieved 20.8.2012.

30

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

including the right to data protection and the right to privacy, at the centre of the
discussion. Law-enforcement matters are reflected in this triangular diplomacy, but
they are arguably not the most central. For the individual, surface 1 is the least
problematic, it represents the classical configuration in which data protection law has
historically developed. With regard to the issue of cybercrime, surface 1 is also where the
individual enjoys the best protection and best guarantees in terms of legal certainty and
redress. Surface 2 is more problematic, especially in a cloud computing context, because it
involves cross-border data transfers. Surface 2 also raises a question on which issue is
most central: transnational "cybercrime" or the handling by company of data on a
transnational scale. Surface 3 is the most problematic because in the confrontation
between states and the inter-state system, especially with regard issues of cyber-espionage
and cyber-sabotage, the individual and her rights all but disappear.

Where cloud computing is possibly the most disruptive, then, is not in the new possibilities
it offers to criminals and fraudsters, but in the fact that it breaks away from the forty-year-
old legal model for international data transfers. This is the issue we will discuss in the
remainder of this section by examining successively each tip of the triangular diplomacy
system at work in cloud computing.

3.2.	The companies/states/inter-state relations

The cloud is first a field of competition for private companies. Major IT companies are
advertising cloud computing with unprecedented urgency, because they fear that their
customers could switch to competitors' platforms offering irresistible cost-savings52, thus
destroying long-held business franchises. The market for cloud services is heavily
subcontracted, both for the physical infrastructure comprising data centres as well as the
"stacks" (layering of levels) of software that provide the functional elements compromising
the totality of the service. Both software and hardware have to be maintained, and these
are governed by "service level agreement" (SLA) contracts which guarantee overall levels
of performance, reliability, and security. There is intense price-driven competition, and
providers will arrange for reserve capacity with diverse subcontractors to cope with
anticipated variations in demand. Advanced forms of cloud computing, but also costs in
non-standard PaaS, may also create powerful "lock-in" effects, which lead to strategic
games between industry, regulators and standards bodies. Given the complexity of these
relationships, the policy discussions of cloud computing have become very confused
by the term being informally applied to almost any Internet service offering some
combination of communications and remote storage of data provided by an
intermediary.

Even though the marketing deployed around cloud technologies have blurred what is really
new in these technologies, two new features can be underlined: data-at-rest are becoming
vulnerable and massively-parallel computation are becoming a commodity, and this will
have profoundly disruptive policy implications for privacy, security and data sovereignty.

The main challenge in this companies/companies relationship is the rights of
individuals whose data is being processed. These rights are indeed subsumed into a
complex mesh of contracts that are primarily concerned with abstracting the details of
where and how processing actually takes place, in the interest of economic efficiency. The
legal section 4.3 details further the aspect of legal responsibilities.

In any case a data controller, defined as the organisation(s) which determine the "means

52	Up to 90% savings compared to "on-premise" computing according to industry figures.

31

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

and purposes" of processing, must make a contract to specify the conduct required of any
Processor employed to perform limited operations on behalf of the controller. A critical
question therefore is which kinds of cloud provider qualify as controllers or
processors. The challenge of legal definitions of both is detailed further in the section 4.3.
In general, PaaS and IaaS providers know nothing about the function of the programs run
or meaning of the data processed by their commercial customers, and will have no
relationship with the individuals whose data is processed. Therefore the customer will be
the controller and must ensure their contract with the cloud provider guarantees effective
protection for the individuals whose data is processed.

However SaaS is normally restricted to authorised users through some form of identity
management system, which requires autonomous operational decisions by the provider (for
example if a user requests a reset of their password, an immediate security assessment
must be made whether this is an attempt to break into the system). SaaS providers are
therefore likely to be deemed joint controllers together with the customer organization. The
main question that arises then is: if there are joint controllers, what form of contract should
govern that relationship? The EU DP Directive of 1995 did not really foresee this situation.
cloud computing is dominated by US companies, many of whom presumed that Safe
Harbour self-certification would relieve them of the obligation to agree contracts with their
customers. However as we have seen, PaaS and IaaS are intrinsically Processor roles which
cannot fulfill any of the privacy principles on which Safe Harbour is founded. This was never
satisfactorily resolved53 by the Commission before the agreement was hastily concluded
over the objections of European DPAs54. As a result many US cloud providers advertise Safe
Harbour certification with insupportable claims that this legalizes transfers of EU data into
US clouds, and since 2009 several have altered their self-certification filings to claim the
oxymoronic status of Safe-Harbour-as-a-Processor. The Article 29 Data Protection Working
Party (WP29) have clarified that this is insufficient their recent opinion55.

The concepts of controller and processor are thus subject to contested interpretation, and
this was true even before the advent of cloud computing56. The legal definitional challenges
of these interpretations are analysed in depth in section 4.

3.3.	The states/inter-state/companies relations

In the field of cybercrime, the challenge of privacy in a cloud context highlighted above is
also underestimated, if not ignored. What is at stake here is the second 'segment' of
triangular diplomacy, i.e. the states/companies relationship and how they unfold with
respect to the question of data protection. In fora such as the Council of Europe "Octopus"
Cybercrime conferences for instance, Data Protection laws appear to be very marginal in
the agenda set priorities, and inadequately addressed to meet the challenges.

In 2007, the Council of Europe - under the Project on Cybercrime - set up a working group
with representatives from law enforcement, industry and service provider associations that
prepared draft guidelines which were adopted by the global Octopus Interface conference in
Strasbourg in April 2008. The European Union's Justice and Home Affairs Council

53	There is no support in EU materials for the substance of US Department of Commerce Safe Harbour FAQ 10.

54	"Having examined the new version of the documents received on 28 April and 2 May, the Working Party
confirms its previous Opinions and considers it essential that the following issues and recommendations be given
due consideration." See Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2000), Opinion on the level of
protection provided by the "Safe Harbour Principles", 2000.

55	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2012), Opinion 196 on Cloud Computing, July 2012.

56	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2010(c)), Opinion 169 on the concepts of "controller" and
"processor", February 2010.

32

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

recommended in November 200857 that the European Commission work on the basis of the
guidelines adopted by the Council of Europe conference and took note of eight specific
recommendations.

Allegedly, the question of the protection of fundamental rights and the role of the Internet
industry in this respect is being addressed by a number of initiatives, such as the Global
Network Initiative - Protecting and advancing Freedom of Expression and Privacy in
Information and Communications technologies58. This initiative establishes principles on
Freedom of Expression and Privacy and has been developed by companies, investors, civil
society organizations and academics59. A careful analysis of these initiatives however
shows a worrying lack of clarity in definitions used, and cannot be considered as
adequate tools to meet the challenges. Despite welcoming attempts to clarify the
issues at stake60, the question of Law enforcement/Internet service provider cooperation in
the investigation of cybercrime is still critical. In a European context, the newly created
cybercrime centre raises concern: if the Centre is intended to fuse information from open
sources, private industry, police and academia, and is intended to serve as a platform for
European cybercrime investigators, what legal framework are in place to deal with privacy
and data protection in relation to cloud computing? The potential for misuses and abuses
by law enforcement actors and agencies becomes an issue of serious concern, and this
critical challenge is addressed in section 4.4.

The question of privacy and data protection is furthermore challenged by
exceptional measures taken in the name of security and the fight against
terrorism. The US context is here particularly highlighting, both in the case of the Patriot
Act and in the case of the US Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Amendment Act of 2008.
These examples illustrate conflicts that can arise in the state/companies relationships. The
major Cloud providers are transnational companies subject to conflicts of international
public law. Which law they choose to obey will be governed by the penalties applicable and
exigencies of the situation, and in practice the predominant allegiances of the company
management. So far, almost all the attention on such conflicts has been focussed on the US
PATRIOT Act, but there has been virtually no discussion of the implications of the US
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Amendment Act of 2008. §1881a of FISAA for the first
time created a power of mass-surveillance specifically targeted at the data of non-US
persons located outside the US, which applies to Cloud computing. Although all of the
constituent definitions had been defined in earlier statutes, the conjunction of all of these
elements was new.

The law was passed in the aftermath of allegations of "warrantless wiretapping" affecting
US citizens after the attacks of 9/11. Accounts emerged in the US media in 2005 that
surveillance of Internet and telephone communications had been conducted in violation of
strict constitutional and statutory protections afforded to US citizens (and legal residents).
In response to mounting public concern, in 2007 Congress enacted the Protect America Act
as a temporary measure, which aimed to legalize whatever surveillance activities were still
being conducted, and to grant retroactive immunity to telecommunications companies
implicated (who would otherwise have been liable for heavy damages for their complicity). 57 58 59 60

57	See Council of the EU, Council Conclusions on a Concerted Work Strategy and Practical Measures Against

Cybercrime,	Brussels,	27-28	November	2008,	available	at:

http://www.eu2008.fr/webdav/site/PFUE/shared/import/1127_JAI/Conclusions/JHA_Council_conclusions_Cybercri
me_EN.pdf

58	See Global Network Initiative website, available at: http://globalnetworkinitiative.org/principles/index.php

59	Participants are listed on the GNI website through the following link:
http://globalnetworkinitiative.org/participants/index.php

60	See for instance: van Genderen, R., (2008), Cybercrime investigation and the protection of personal data and
privacy, Discussion paper, Economic Crime Division Directorate General of Human Rights and Legal Affairs,
Strasbourg, France, 25 March 2008.

33

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

There followed a test case at the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review, which
held definitively that the Fourth Amendment requirement for a specific warrant only applied
to surveillance directed at US persons61. This opened the door for Congress to enact FISAA
§1881a in 2008, which authorized mass-surveillance of foreigners (outside US territory),
but whose data was within range of US jurisdiction. However, the most significant change
escaped any comment or public debate altogether. The scope of surveillance was
extended beyond interception of communications, to include any data in public
cloud computing as well. This change occurred merely by incorporating "remote
computing services" into the definition of an "electronic communication service provider"62 63.

3.4.	The inter-state/states/companies relation

The scope of surveillance acted in the above described FISAA, and the fact that it has been
extended beyond interception of communications to include any data in public cloud
computing as well, has very strong implications on EU data sovereignty and the
protection of its citizens' rights. The implications for EU Fundamental Rights flow from
the definition of "foreign intelligence information", which includes information with respect
to a foreign-based political organization or foreign territory that relates to the conduct of
the foreign affairs of the United States63. In other words, it is lawful in the US to
conduct purely political surveillance on foreigners' data accessible in US Clouds.

This represents a sea change from the concerns expressed in 2001 by the European
Parliament over the "ECHELON" system of strategic communications surveillance64.
Following concerns about "cookie hijacking" attacks on web browsers using wireless
connections, most popular US based web sites now encrypt communications in transit, and
so would not be (directly65) vulnerable to interception. But FISAAA 1881a means that any
data-at-rest formerly processed "on premise" within the EU, which becomes migrated into
Clouds, becomes liable to mass-surveillance - for purposes of furthering the foreign affairs
of the US (as well as the expected purposes of terrorism, money-laundering etc.).

As a consequence, FISAA §1881a can be seen as a categorically much graver risk to
EU data sovereignty than other laws hitherto considered by EU policy-makers:

•	new NSA data centres constructed for storage and analysis on an unprecedented

scale66

•	the extension of scope from communications-in-transit to include data inside US
Clouds67

•	whistleblower reports of the sophistication of data analysis contemplated68

•	the express targeting of foreign data without safeguards applicable to US citizens69

61	See: www.fas.org/irp/agency/doi/fisa/fiscr082208.pdf.

62	See: §1880 the provision "to the public of computer storage or processing services by means of an electronic
communications system".

63	By truncating and substituting limbs of clauses §1801e and §1801a.

64	European Parliament (2001), Report on the existence of a global system for the interception of private and
commercial communications (ECHELON interception system) (2001/2098(INI)), PE 305.391 A5-0264/2001.

65	See: http://paranoia.dubfire.net/2011_09_01_archive.html

66	Wired Magazine, The NSA Is Building the Country's Biggest Spy Center, 1th March 2012, available at:
http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2012/03/ff_nsadatacenter/

67	See: 18 USC § 2711(2) the term "remote computing service" means the provision to the public of computer
storage or processing services by means of an electronic communications system.

68	W. Binney's Keynote at HOPE 9 conference (New York City, 13th July 2012, 1hr 12m, available at:
http://www.youtube.lu/watch?v=hqN59beaFMI.

34

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

• a doctrine of indiscriminate collection, which only seeks to control subsequent
access69 70 71 72

Remarkably, it does not appear that the EU Commission, national DPAs, or the
European Parliament had any awareness of FISAAA 1881a until mid-2011. Most
attention continues to be focussed on the US Patriot Act of 2001, which certainly contains
powers for direct access to EU data, but nothing like 1881a's heavy-calibre mass-
surveillance fire-power aimed at the Cloud. A few EP questions have now been asked and in
February 2012 Commissioner Reding speculated that any such conflicts of law arising might
have to be settled at the International Court of the Hague71 (although the US does not
recognize its jurisdiction).

The root problem is that cloud computing breaks the forty year old legal model for
international data transfers72. The primary desideratum would be a comprehensive
international treaty guaranteeing full reciprocity of rights, but otherwise exceptions
("derogations") can be recognized in particular circumstances providing there are
safeguards appropriate to the specific situation. Cloud computing breaks the golden rule
that "the exception must not become the rule". Once data is transferred into a Cloud,
sovereignty is surrendered. In summary, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that the EU is
not addressing properly an irrevocable loss of data sovereignty, and allowing
errors made during the Safe Harbour negotiations of 2000 to be consolidated, not
corrected.

4.	CLOUD COMPUTING AND CYBERCRIME:	LEGAL

CHALLENGES FOR DATA PROTECTION LAW

KEY FINDINGS

•	Conceptual uncertainties emerge in relation to the wide room of discretion by the
Member States at times of establishing jurisdiction i.e. the applicable implementing
law of the Member State under the DPD. This most directly causes uncertainty for
any affected individual who might face conflict of laws resulting from the multiple
national implementing legislations. A targeting/directing test would establish
jurisdiction in relation to data connected to the EU, but would not rule out conflict of
laws nor preclude secret surveillance by third countries. Yet, these initiatives should
be seen as valuable tool to ensure that US companies are "in principle" covered by
EU DP Law.

•	An 'accountability approach' would imply the vesting of obligations and liabilities
upon every actor with considerable power, i.e. knowledge and control of the
personal data. This explains why anonymous data, i.e. data to which there is a
minimized risk of unauthorized access, are no 'personal data' in the DPD. Standard
setting on the EU level as regards what constitutes personal data would contribute
to a harmonized approach to the "who" question (see Annex 2), i.e. who is the cloud

69	FISCR	22nd	August 2008 judgement on Protect America 2007, available at:

www.fas.org/irp/agency/doj/fisa/fiscr082208.pdf.

70	"Before the enactment of the FAA... in effect, the Intelligence Community treated non-U.S. persons located
overseas like persons in the United States, even though foreigners outside the United States generally are not
entitled to the protections of the Fourth Amendment", Background Paper on Title VII of FISA Prepared by the DoJ
and ODN, Feb 2012, available at: www.fas.org/irp/news/2012/02/dni020812.pdf

71	See: http://news.bbc.co.uk/democracylive/hi/europe/newsid_9695000/9695923.stm

72	Hondius, F., (1975), Emerging Data Protection in Europe, North-Holland/American Elsevier.

35

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

user data (joint) controller, data processor, data subject. This "who" question is
important in light of the question of jurisdiction and the resulting or potential
responsibilities, liabilities and obligations towards the individual.

• Definitional uncertainties also emerge in relation to self-regulatory data protection
regimes 'quite separate from the wider EU level framework on data protection',
when assessing data transfers to third countries. The notion of 'adequacy' as
regards data transfers to third countries is defined on several levels (Member
States, EC and EUROPOL), and this further expands the vulnerability of the data
subject as regards what actually are 'adequate data protection standards', and the
capacity to control her/his data as a fundamental right. This is exacerbated by the
lack of a concept of cybercrime within the EU, which creates even more legal
uncertainty for the individual as regards the justification of lower data protection
standards for cybercrime.

As underlined above, cloud computing raises several challenges related to legal uncertainty
about fundamental legal concepts and general principles in the current multiple,
fragmented and incomplete EU data protection legislative framework. A key guiding
question is the extent to which the Union's legislative regime is well-equipped to deal with
the data protection challenges posed at the intersection of cloud computing and crime
prevention/fighting. Although the Treaty of Lisbon formally abolished the distinction
between the First and Third Pillars (this last one corresponding to Police and Judicial
Cooperation in Criminal Matters),73 the existing EU legal complex still remains 'pillarised' in
nature and guided by this old division. The Data Protection Directive (DPD)74 and the
Proposal for a General Data Protection Regulation (PGDPR)75 do not apply to law
enforcement activities,76 nor to domestic processing, which is still governed by various
national regulatory systems in the different areas of law touched by cloud computing (i.e.
civil law, administrative and commercial law). Furthermore, old third pillar instruments such
as the Framework Decision (DPFD)77 and the Proposal for a Police and Criminal Justice Data
Protection Directive (PPCJDD)78 do not apply to 'cloud computing providers' and to EU
Home Affairs Agencies such as EUROPOL79.

73	The first and third pillar respectively correspond to title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community
('Visas, Asylum, Immigration and Other Policies related to the Free Movement of Persons') and title VI of the
Treaty on European Union ('Provisions on Police and Judicial Cooperation in Criminal Matters').

74	European Parliament and Council of the European Union (1995), Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament
and Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and
on the free movement of such data, OJ L 281, 23.11.1995.

75	European Commission (2012(b)), Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on
the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data
(General Data Protection Regulation), COM(2012) 11 final, Brussels, 25.01.2012.

76	Other relevant first pillar instruments for cloud computing are the e-Privacy Directive and the Data Retention
Directive: European Parliament and Council of the European Union (2002), Directive 2002/58/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of
privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic communications), OJ L 201,
31.7.2002/ European Parliament and Council of the European Union (2006), Directive 2006/24/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006 on the retention of data generated or processed in connection
with the provision of publicly available electronic communications services or of public communications networks
and amending Directive 2002/58/EC, OJ L 105, 13.44.2006. Whereas the e-privacy Directive applies to public
communications services (Recital 10 and Article 3.1), the DPD applies to non-public communications services.

77	Council of the EU (2008(a)), Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA of 27 November 2008 on the protection of
personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters, OJ L 350,
30.12.2008.

78	European Commission (2012(c)), Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the
protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes

36

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

4.1.	Definitional dilemma in the EU data protection legal
framework

The EU data protection legal framework is affected by important definitional dilemmas.
First, conceptual uncertainties in the context of the old First Pillar relate to the
wide room of discretion by the Member States at times of establishing jurisdiction

i.e. the applicable implementing law of the Member State under the DPD. This most
directly causes uncertainty for any affected individual who might face conflict of laws
resulting from the multiple national implementing legislations. This touches most directly
upon the relationship 'company-company' in our 'triangular diplomacy' conceptual
framework, as the applicable substantive law determines both the obligations of data
controllers and processors and the rights and level of protection of the individual as 'data
subject' or 'consumer'.

Secondly, definitional uncertainties also emerge in relation to self-regulatory data
protection regimes 'quite separate from the wider EU level framework on data
protection',79 80 when assessing data transfers to third countries. This question
touches upon the relationship 'state-state' and 'state-company' due to increasing
cooperation between the private sector and law enforcement agencies (LEA's), at national
and EU levels, in the 'fight against crime' 'in the cloud'. De Hert has stressed that 'it is very
likely that data collected by commercial data controllers in the course of their duties are
used by law enforcement agencies'81. This is indeed likely to be occurring independently of
the actual existence of any applicable or common legal framework setting the necessary
data standards and regulations framing this relationship and safeguarding the capacity of
the individual to control her/his data as a fundamental right. The potential for misuses and
abuses by law enforcement actors and agencies becomes henceforth an issue of serious
concern. The lack of a concept of cybercrime in EU law raises even more concerns for the
individual about the justification for lower data protection standards or the application of
exceptions to those82.

The European Commission has confirmed that 'cloud computing' has caused a loss of
control by the individual over her/his data.83 This Section shows how from a data protection

of prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties,
and the free movement of such data, COM(2012) 10 final, Brussels, 25.01.2012.

79	Recital 15 and Article 2.3(b) PPCJDD; EUROPOL is governed by another third pillar instrument: Article 23.2
Council Decision of 6 April 2009 establishing the European Police Office (EUROPOL) 2009/371/JHA), OJ L 121,
15.05.2009.

80	The international agreements are available on: https://www.EUROPOL.europa.eu/content/page/international-
relations-31; De Hert, P. and B. de Schutter (2008), 'International Transfers of Data in the Field of JHA: The
Lessons of EUROPOL, PRN and Swift', in B. Martenczuk and S. van Thiel (eds.), Justice, Liberty, Security: New
Challenges for EU External Relations, Brussels: VUBPress, p. 320; De Busser, E. (2012), 'The Adequacy of an U-US
Partnership', in S. Gutwirth et al. (eds.), European Data Protection: In Good Health?,
Dordrecht/Heidelberg/London/New York: Springer, 2012, p. 191; European Parliament (2011), Implementation of
the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and its Impact on EU Home Affairs Agencies. Frontex, EUROPOL and the
European Asylum Support Office, PE 453.196, August pp. 28, 73, 69, 74; European Parliament (2011), Developing
an EU Internal Security Strategy, fighting terrorism and organised crime, PE 462.423, November, p. 49.

81	De Hert, P. and V. Papakonstantinou (2012), 'The Police and Criminal Justice Data Protection Directive:
Comment and Analysis', Computers & Law Magazine of SCL, Vol. 22, No. 6, February/March, p. 2.

82	Without, however, violating the core-periphery of human rights: Porcedda, M.G., Data Protection and the
Prevention of Cybercrime: The EU as an Area of Security?, EUI Working Paper, Law, p. 7.

83	European Commission (2010(c)), Communication to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and
Social Committee and the Committee of Regions: A comprehensive approach on personal data protection in the
European Union, COM(2010) 609 final, Brussels, 4.11.2010, pp. 2, 11; European Commission (2012(a)), Data
protection reform: Frequently asked questions, MEMO/12/41, Brussels, 25.01.2012.

37

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

viewpoint, cloud computing has fundamentally transformed the individual, located
in the centre of the 'triangular diplomacy' conceptual framework (cf figure 2), from a
data subject' or 'consumer' to a product or commodity in relation with the private
sector and law enforcement within the Member States, the EU, and beyond. At this
stage there is not really any possibility for DPAs to guarantee the conformity of
data processing "in the cloud” with EU DP law. Harmonization of key fundamental
legal concepts at Union levels could be a welcome step forward if guided by the
accountability principle, transparency84, ownership and integrity of data, with a view to
respect the right to data protection (Article 16.1 Treaty on the Functioning of the EU and
Article 8 EU Charter of Fundamental Rights). The data subject 'should thus be at the heart
of policy attention'85, and full transparency would be central as regards basic fundamental
legal concepts such as jurisdiction, data processor/data controller, transfers of data and
cybercrime, as well as the implications of EU level law enforcement agencies activities such
as EUROPOL, which we now enter into analysing.

4.2.	The challenge of jurisdiction

The first legal challenge laying at the intersection between cloud computing and crime
fighting is that of jurisdiction. This concept determines both the responsibilities and legal
liabilities of data controllers and processors and the rights of the individual as 'data
subject'. As said above, data processing operations take place across different sovereign
jurisdictions, and the market for Cloud services is heavily subcontracted for the physical
infrastructure comprising datacentres. The DPD contains two main jurisdictional grounds:
Article 4§1 DPD, based on the establishment of an 'EU controller' or the EU equipment of a
'non-EU controller', and Article 17.3 DPD, based on the establishment of an 'EU
processor'86. The key challenge under both grounds is how to distinguish the relationships
data processor/controller and establishment/equipment in cloud computing? Such
definitional uncertainty brings the individual in a vulnerable position with regard to the
applicable national law. The PGDPR has replaced the latter distinction by a 'targeting test'
to establish jurisdiction on the basis of data connected to the EU. Yet, definitional
uncertainty still remains, and conflicts of laws would not be ruled out87.

84	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2010(a)), Opinion 3/2010 on the principle of accountability,
00062/10/EN WP 173, Brussels, 13.07.2010; European Parliament (2011(b)), Towards a New EU Legal Framework
for Data Protection and Privacy, Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, PE 453.216, September,
pp. 21-22; Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2010(b)), Opinion 8/2010 on applicable law, 0836
02/10/EN WP 179, Brussels, 16.12.2010, p. 29.

85	European Parliament (2011(b)), pp. 10, 11.

86	See also Article 30 and Recital 66 Draft Regulation.

87	''Main establishment' means as regards the controller, the place of its establishment in the Union where the
main decisions as to the purposes, conditions and means of the processing of personal data are taken; if no
decisions as to the purposes, conditions and means of the processing of personal data are taken in the Union, the
main establishment is the place where the main processing activities in the context of the activities of an
establishment of a controller in the Union take place. As regards the processor, 'main establishment' means the
place of its central administration in the Union.'; Hon, W.K., J. Hornle and C. Millard, 2011, p. 12.

38

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

According to Article 4§1 DPD,88 jurisdiction is established independently of the physical
location of the data, or the citizenship or residence of the data subject.89 Instead, it should,
firstly, be verified whether an 'EU cloud user' is a data controller in his own right, or in
relation to a non-EU controller, whether the EU cloud user is an establishment within the
meaning of Article 4.1(a) DPD, or equipment within the meaning of Article 4.1(c) DP (in
case the non-EU controller installs cookies on installations of the user) - the
establishment/equipment test90. Following a negative answer to both questions, it must be
verified whether the non-EU controller has an EU data centre. An first question is whether
space rented by a non-EU provider in an EU data centre also constitutes 'establishment'91.

The next question is whether the EU data centre is processing 'within the context of its
activities'. In that case, that establishment can be considered a (relevant) establishment
under Article 4.1(a) DPD. The WP29 proposed that 'in the context of the activities of an
establishment of the controller' includes both processing activities and other activities (such
as marketing)92. If, on the other hand, the EU data centre is processing within the context
of the non-EU controllers' activities, a distinction should be made between whether or not
the non-EU controller owns an 'EU data centre'. Following a positive answer, the EU data
centre (often IaaS and PaaS providers) can be considered as equipment (or an irrelevant
establishment) under Article 4.1(c) DPD93. In those cases where the EU data centre is a
mere subsidiary (often SaaS providers) of the non-EU controller, the EU data centre can
also be considered as both equipment under Article 4.1(a) DPD. Yet, looking through the
corporate veil can show that such processors are controllers in their own right.

88	'1. Each Member State shall apply the national provisions it adopts pursuant to this Directive to the processing
of personal data where: (a) the processing is carried out in the context of the activities of an establishment of the
controller on the territory of the Member State; when the same controller is established on the territory of several
Member States, he must take the necessary measures to ensure that each of these establishments complies with
the obligations laid down by the national law applicable; (b) the controller is not established on the Member
State's territory, but in a place where its national law applies by virtue of international public law; (c) the
controller is not established on Community territory and, for purposes of processing personal data makes use of
equipment, automated or otherwise, situated on the territory of the said Member State, unless such equipment is
used only for purposes of transit through the territory of the Community.'

89	Hon, W.K., C. Millard and I. Walden (2011 (b)), Who is responsible for 'Personal Data'in Cloud Computing? The
Cloud of Unknowing, Part 2, Queen Mary School of Law Legal Studies Research Paper No. 77/2011, March, p. 7;
Yet, under Article 4.1(c), the location of equipment or means of processing could overlap with the location of
processing.

90	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2008), Opinion 1/2008 on data protection issues related to
search engines, 00737/EN WP 148, Brussels, 04.04.2008, pp. 10, 11; Article 29 Data Protection Working Party
(WP29) (2009(b)), Opinion 5/2009 on online social networking, 01189/09/EN WP 163, Brussels, 12.06.2009, p. 5;
Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2010 (b)), Opinion 8/2010 on applicable law, 0836 02/10/EN WP 179,
Brussels, 16.12.2010, pp. 21, 22.

91	Hon, W.K., J. Hornle and C. Millard (2011), "Data Protection Jurisdiction and Cloud Computing - When are Cloud
Users and Providers Subject to EU Data Protection Law? The Cloud of Unknowing, Part 3", Queen Mary School of
Law Legal Studies Research Paper No. 84/2011, February, p. 18.

92	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2008), p. 10; This stance has been criticized: Hon, W.K., J.
Hornle and C. Millard 2011, p. 10.

93	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2010(b)), p. 19; The definitions 'relevant' and 'irrelevant'
establishment were introduced by the WP29 because the wording of Article 4.1(c) DPD applies that article only
when 'the controller is not established on Community territory'. As seen above, a controller can be established on
Community territory but without processing personal data in the context of that establishment's activities, so that
Article 4.1(a) does not apply. Yet, in that case Article 4.1(c) DPD can also not apply as the controller is established
on Community territory'. It has therefore been suggested that the article should be read as 'the controller does
not have any establishment on the territory of a Member State in the context of which it processes personal data'.
For the same reason, Article 3.2 Draft Regulation (see below) should arguably be modified. There is however no
similar loophole for processors which. Article 3.1 of the Regulation applies the Regulation if a provider processes
personal data in the context of the activities of an establishment of a provider in the Union, which seems to imply
that the processor would be 'subject to the draft Regulation in relation to its worldwide activities'.: Hon, W.K., J.
Hornle and C. Millard, 2011, pp. 20, 32, 37, 38.

39

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Within a Cloud Legal Project (CLP), it has been proposed to abolish the rigid
'establishment/equipment test' in favor of a targeting/directing test in relation to data
connected to the EU94. The WP29 has confirmed this position: 'Article 4(1)c strives to
ensure the right to the protection of personal data provided by the EU Directive even where
the controller is not established in EU/EU territory but where the processing is in some way
connected with the EU.95' The protection of individuals inside the EU is also one of the main
purposes of Article 4.1(c) DPD96, and therefore, Kuner argued to make this idea explicit by
focusing on 'the application of EU law to situations in which the data controller determines
in an untransparent way how data are processed on the individual's computer'.

A targeting test denotes an accountability approach that would solve key questions about
applicable law, as mapped by the EC and the EP: '[...] in case where the relevant place of
establishment of a cloud provider may be hard to determine, e.g. for a non-EU user of a
non-EU provider operating equipment in the EU;'97 'In terms of applicability of the law,
there is a clear gap when both the provider and its equipment (data centres, servers, etc.)
are located outside the EU but the service is used by EU citizens [,..].98' Article 3.2 PGDPR
introduces a targeting test, and applies the Regulation 'to the processing of personal data
of data subjects residing in the Union by a controller not established in the Union, where
the processing activities are related to: (a) the offering of goods or services to such data
subjects in the Union; or (b) the monitoring of their behaviour'. A similar proposal was
made by Spoenle within the COE's discussions to extend the jurisdictional scope of Article
32(b) Cybercrime Convention:99 the power of disposal as a legal connecting factor detached
from location parameter would connect any data to the person that hold the right to 'alter,
delete, suppress or to render unusable as well as the right to exclude others from access
and any usage whatsoever'100. However, such initiatives won't rule out conflict of laws and
a targeting test cannot preclude secret surveillance by third countries. These initiatives
should be seen as valuable tool to ensure that US companies are "in principle" covered by
EU DP Law.

4.3.	The challenge of responsibility: data controller, data processor
and personal data

The distinctions between cloud user, data processor, data (joint) controller101 and data
subject are further blurred by cloud computing102. This "who" question (see Annex 2) is

94	Hon, W.K., J. Hornle and C. Millard, 2011, pp. 34-37.

95	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2010(b)), p. 29.

96	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2002), Working document on determining the international
application of EU data protection law to personal data processing on the Internet by non-EU based web sites,
5035/01/EN/Final WP 56, Brussels, 30.04.2002, p. 7.

97	European Commission (2012(e)), Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the
Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of Regions: Unleashing the Potential of
Cloud Computing in Europe, COM(2012) 529 /2, Brussels, 27.09.2012, p. 8.

98	European Parliament (2012(a)), Cloud Computing, Policy Department Economic and Scientific Policy, PE
475.104, May, p. 59.

99	Council of Europe (2001), Convention on Cybercrime, Budapest, 23.11.2001: 'Article 32 - Trans-border access
to stored computer data with consent or where publicly available: A Party may, without the authorisation of
another Party: a. access publicly available (open source) stored computer data, regardless of where the data is
located geographically; or b. access or receive, through a computer system in its territory, stored computer data
located in another Party, if the Party obtains the lawful and voluntary consent of the person who has the lawful
authority to disclose the data to the Party through that computer system.'

100	Council of Europe (2010 (b)), Cloud Computing and cybercrime investigations: Territoriality vs. The power of
disposal, discussion paper, prepared by J. Spoenle, 31.08.2010, p. 10.

101	Council of Europe (2010 (a)), Cloud computing and its implications on data protection, discussion paper, March,
prepared by Research Centre on IT and Law (CRID), p. 16; Article 24 Draft Regulation introduced the concept of
joint controllers.

40

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

important in light of the question of jurisdiction and the resulting or potential
responsibilities, liabilities and obligations towards the individual. It is important that the
individual has legal certainty and keeps the ownership over her/his data, and this explains
the importance of his/her consent with the allocation of responsibilities. De Hert defended
to boldly abolish the notion of data processors from the new Regulation and 'vest the data
controller title, rights and obligations upon any one processing personal information,
regardless of its means, conditions or purposes102 103. Likewise, the CLP proposed to abandon
the binary distinction between controller and processor in a cloud computing context104.
The COE's 'Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing
of Personal Data' does not even distinguish between these categories105. The WP29 stated
that it is important to soundly read the contract that can give indications for the power
relationships between parties106. With regard to joint-controllers, it is questioned what form
of contract should govern that relationship?

An 'accountability approach' would then imply the vesting of obligations and liabilities upon
every actor with considerable power, i.e. knowledge and control of the personal data. This
explains why anonymous data, i.e. data to which there is a minimized risk of unauthorized
access, are no 'personal data' in the DPD (Recital 26 DPD)107. The relation between the
definition of anonymous data and the definition of data controller/processor is also
apparent in a recent study of the European Parliament (EP) that successively identifies the
definition of data controller and data processor, ownership and confidentiality as
outstanding regulatory issues108.

A first question is whether the process of anonymisation of data is 'data processing'
covered by the DPD. Secondly, the definition of 'anonymous data' is in itself an open
debate. Information to which there is only a remote, highly theoretical risk of identification,
due to sufficient protection measures against unauthorized access, is arguably not
considered as personal data109. The WP29's focus on preventing identification has,
therefore, been questioned in favor of an assessment of the risks to individuals' privacy.
The CLP finds that information temporarily exposed unencrypted due to transient
processing operations, or law enforcement access, could arguably still be considered as

102	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2009(a)), The Future of Privacy Joint contribution to the
Consultation of the European Commission on the legal framework for the fundamental right to protection of
personal data, 02356/09/EN WP 168, 01.12.2009, p. 12.

103	De Hert, P. and V. Papakonstantinou (2012), op.cit., Computer Law & Security Review, Vol. 28, No. 2, April, p.
134.

104	Hon, W.K., C. Millard and I. Walden, 2011 (b), op.cit., p. 24.

105	Council of Europe (1981), Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of
Personal Data' does not make a distinction between data controller and data processor, Strasbourg, 21.1.1981.

106	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2010 (c)), Opinion 1/2010 on the concepts of 'controller' and
'processor', 00264/10/EN WP 169, Brussels, 16.02.2010, p. 9: 'The concept of controller is a functional concept,
intended to allocate responsibilities where the factual influence is [...].'

107	The DPD does also not apply to individuals who upload data for purely personal purposes or in the course of a
household activity, to legal persons and trade secrets. Yet, legal persons are protected under the privacy and
electronic communications Directive (Article 1.2); Council of Europe (2010(a)), p. 14; Poulet, Y. et al. (2011),
"Data Protection in the Clouds", in. Gutwirth et al. (eds.), Computers, Privacy and Data Protection: an Element of
Choice, Dordrecht/Heidelberg/London/New York: Springer, 2011, p. 388; Compare with the U.S. where 'there is
something like privacy of a legal person': Ruiter, J. and W. Martijn, "Privacy Regulations for Cloud Computing:
Compliance and Implementation in Theory and Practice", in S. Gutwirth et al. (eds.), Computers, Privacy and Data
Protection: an Element of Choice, Dordrecht/Heidelberg/London/New York: Springer, 2011, pp. 361-376.

108	European Parliament (2011(d)), Does it help or hinder? Promotion of Innovation on the Internet and Citizen's
Right to Privacy, PE 464.462, December, pp. 84-85.

109	Hon, W.K., C. Millard and I. Walden (2011 (a)), "The Problem of 'Personal Data' in Cloud Computing - What
information is Regulated? The Cloud of Unknowing, Part 1", Queen Mary School of Law Legal Studies Research
Paper No. 75/2011, March, pp. 40, 41.

41

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

anonymous data110. On the other hand, Paul Ohm has warned for the failure of
anonymisation as a privacy-protecting tool111.

There is generally a higher risk of unauthorized data access by certain SaaS providers
(such as the usual social networking sites) than by IaaS or PaaS providers as supposedly
pure infrastructure providers or neutral intermediaries that host data without any
knowledge of the 'personal data' nature of the data112. Sartor deems such providers not to
be 'data controllers'113, and according to the CLP they are not even 'data processors',
present reasonable protection measures, and absent any line-crossing behaviour following
which they would become data controllers114. The WP29 stressed that '[s]hould processors
[...] communicate them in a way that breaches the contract, they shall also be considered
to be controllers [...]'115. The European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) has stressed
that the 'role played by cloud providers will need to be determined on a case by case basis
[...].'116 A recent EP study has additionally stressed that ([t]here are also ambiguities as to
the role of the cloud computing providers, who - in some cases - can be treated not only
as pure data processors, but also as data controllers, given their impact on how the data is
being processed 'in the cloud'117.

The foregoing explains the importance of the adoption of appropriate security standards
against unauthorized access, as confirmed by the EC118. Standard setting on the EU level
would contribute to a harmonized approach to the "who" question, and as such, help to
tackle the related jurisdictional issues.

4.4.	Data transfers/processing to third countries

The notion of 'adequacy' as regards data transfers to third countries is defined on several
levels (Member States, EC and EUROPOL), and this further expands the vulnerability of the
data subject as regards what actually are 'adequate data protection standards'. The focus
could be again on 'the minimized risk' of unauthorized access in third countries119. Under
the DPD and the PGDPR, the Member States have great influence to determine adequacy
requirements for data transfers to third countries120.

110	Hon, W.K., C. Millard and I. Walden, 2011 (a), pp. 27, 28, 33.

111	Ohm, P., 'Broken Promises of Privacy: Responding to the Surprising Failure of Anonymization', 57 UCLA Law
Review 1701 (2010).

112	Hon, W.K., C. Millard and I. Walden, 2011 (a), pp. 36, 37; Hon, W.K., C. Millard and I. Walden, 2011 (b), pp.1,
18.

113	Sartor, G. (2012), Providers' Liabilities in the New EU Data Protection Regulation: A Threat to Internet
Freedoms?, EUI Working Papers, Law, No. 24, p. 14.

114	I.e. unless 'they monitor the processing with a view to accessing or using the personal data', or 'giving third
parties access to data without authority: Hon, W.K., C. Millard and I. Walden, 2011 (b), pp. 17, 20, 21.

115	WP29, 2012, op.cit., p. 14.

116	Hustinx, P. (2010), Data Protection and Cloud Computing under EU Law, Third European Cyber Security
Awareness Day BSA, European Parliament, 13 April 2010, p. 3.

117	European Parliament (2012(c)), Reforming the Data Protection Package, PE 492.431, September, p. 18.

118	European Commission (2012(d)), p. 10; European Commission (2010), Communication to the European
Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of Regions: A Digital Agenda for
Europe, COM(2010) 245 final/2, Brussels, 26.8.2010, pp. 23, 24; The EC is currently also consulting on a future
EU Network and Information Security legislative initiative, which would introduce the requirement of risk
management practices: http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/12/818; Hon, W.K., C.
Millard and I. Walden, 2011 (b), p. 22; Kroes, N. (2011), "Towards a European Cloud Computing Strategy", World
Economic Forum Davos 27 January 2011, SPEECH/11/50.

119	Hon, W.K. and C. Millard, 2012, pp. 28, 53, 54.

120	Article 25.2 DPD and Article 13.4 DPFD define the adequacy of the level of protection afforded by a third
country in the light of several circumstances.: '[p]articular consideration shall be given to the nature of the data,
the purpose and duration of the proposed processing operation or operations, the country of origin and country of
final destination, the rules of law, both general and sectoral, in force in the third country in question and the

42

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

Yet, under the PGDPR and PPCJDD the role of the EC would increase through provisions on
delegated and implementing acts, respectively relating to the implementation, and the
amending, supplementing or deletion of non-essential elements of legally binding acts of
the EU121. While this would contribute towards 'uniformity' and national alignment with the
common regulatory system, such an approach has raised important concerns. The EP would
have a limited role in the adoption of an implementing act, and it has therefore questioned
the role and level of discretion that the EC would enjoy through delegated acts122. The
EDPS stressed that vague notions should not justify the adoption of delegated acts as some
of them deal with essential elements in the PGDPR123. This is for instance the case for
instance in relation to those provisions related to what constitutes the threshold for a
personal data breach notification (Articles 31 and 32), what constitutes a high degree of
specific risks (Article 34.2 and 8), or 'important grounds of public interest' (Article 44.1 and
7).

The EC has repeatedly emphasized the need for improved cross-border cooperation though
non-legislative measures and self-regulation124.

The EU-US Safe Harbour Principles are an example in that regard, which allow transfers to
those US organizations (including cloud providers) demonstrating an 'adequate standard of
protection125. Yet, Safe Harbour does not apply to telecommunication common
carriers which also provide cloud computing services. The CLP and the WP29 have
emphasized that the controller needs to check the enforcement of Safe Harbour
Certification126. Besides, the WP29 has stressed that the PGDPR should add that the use of
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties is obligatory with regard to access to personal data for
national security and law enforcement purposes, 'in case of disclosures not authorized by
Union or Member State Law'127. This would imply extending the scope of application of the
PGDPR to law enforcement cooperation with the private sector.

The challenge of data transfers and data processing to third countries is of paramount
importance. This is even more salient in the context of the US PATRIOT and FISAA
described above. There is indeed no indication that the full effects 1881a have on the
human rights of EU data subjects have been addressed by WP29 or the Commission. The
WP29 for instance only mentions PATRIOT in one footnote128 in nearly 140 Opinions issued
since 9/11.

professional rules and security measures'. Yet, according Article 26.2 DPD and Article 13.3(b) DPFD, the Member
States can also apply their national adequacy conditions to data transfer to third countries.

121	Recitals 90, 129 and 130 PGDPR.

122	Council of Europe (2010(a)), p. 22; Reding, V., "Binding Corporate Rules: unleashing the potential of the digital
single market and cloud computing", IAPP Europe Data Protection Congress, Paris, 29.11.2011; European
Parliament (2012), Working Document on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal
data and on the free movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation) on the protection of individuals
with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of prevention,
investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and the free
movement of such data, PE491.322v01-00, Brussels, 6.7.2012, pp. 2, 4.

123	European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) (2012), Opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor on
the data protection reform package, 7.3.2012, pp. 12-13.

124	European Commission (2010(b)), Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on
attacks against information systems and repealing Council Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA, COM(2010) 517
final, Brussels, 30.09.2010, pp. 6, 9;

125	European Commission (2000), Commission Decision of 26 July 2000 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the adequacy of the protection provided by the safe harbour privacy
principles and related frequently asked questions issued by the US Department of Commerce, 2000/520/E, OJ L
215, 25.8.2000.

126	Hon, W.K. and C. Millard (2012), pp. 41-43, 48; Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, 2012, p. 17.

127	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2012(a)), p. 23.

128	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2001), 53 Opinion on the need for a balanced approach in
the fight against terrorism, Dec 2001.

43

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

The WP29 has for instance proposed that "binding corporate rules"- BCR129 can be adapted
to provide adequate safeguards for EU data exported into the Cloud. However, they foresee
and permit secret disclosure of data to "third countries". They say:

In any case, the request for disclosure should be put on hold and the DPA
competent for the controller and the lead DPA for the BCR should be clearly
informed about it.

The question arises, if the CEO and corporate counsel of a major US Cloud company are
faced with a choice between obeying the soft-law exhortations of WP29 which will result in
contempt of the FISA Court for breach of secrecy, or not doing what they "should" (and
side-stepping huge risks of reputation damage to their business), which law is more likely
to be obeyed?

DPA proponents of BCRs-for-processors say they offer theoretically comparable protection
to earlier derogation mechanisms (such as standard contract clauses approved by the
Commission), but those are equally unsuitable to prevent the use of Cloud data for
surveillance purposes. The standard clauses were originally drafted in 2001 for scenarios
such as offshore processing of direct-marketing mailing-lists, but when they were revised in
2010130, they were weakened to accommodate Cloud computing.

The proposed new DP Regulation normalizes the procedure of BCRs-for-processors, and
they are no longer regarded technically as a "derogation". However for the same reasons
that Safe-Harbour-for-processors is a problematic concept (because a IaaS/PaaS Cloud
cannot by definition fulfil any of the SHA Principles) BCRs-for-processors's role should also
be questioned. All they can do is pledge to maintain the Cloud datacentres. They can say
nothing about the meaning of the data, or the substantive functions at the software level of
personal data processing.

Both the WP29 and the Commission place great faith in "audit" procedures to ensure Cloud
services are compliant, but no commercial audit methodology can seek to uncover secret
surveillance which is "lawful" under the national security rubric of a third country
(especially if that audit is conducted by a company from that country). There is no way that
an EU DPA can know whether this is happening or not, if the Cloud software fabric is
designed and controlled from outside EU jurisdiction.

Another challenge are the negotiations by a "High-Level Contact Group" between the EU
and US to arrive at an "Umbrella" agreement governing transfers for law enforcement and
national security, because the US position would exclude commercial Cloud transfers:

The US has rejected the idea to apply the agreement also to data transferred from
private parties in the EU to private parties in the US and subsequently
processed for law enforcement purposes by US competent authorities. Both sides
agree in substance that the agreement should be without prejudice to the activities
in the field of national security, which remains the sole responsibility of Member
States131.

The foregoing shows the lack of an EU legal framework as regards data transfers to third
countries. One step forward would be to extend the scope of application of the PGDPR to
law enforcement cooperation with the private sector. Secondly, standard setting on the EU

129	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29) (2012(b)), 195 Opinion on the BCRs-for-processors, June
2012

130By	allowing	sub-contracting	http://eur-

lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri = 0J:L:2010:039:0005:0018:EN:PDF

131	EU-US Data Protection Non-Paper On Negotiations During 2011, available at:
www.statewatch.org/news/2012/feb/eu-council-usa-dp-agreement-2011-5999-12.pdf

44

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

level would contribute to a harmonized approach as regards adequate data protection
standards for data transfers to third countries.

4.5.	The challenge of regulation for EU Home affairs agencies

The legal challenges stemming from the triangular diplomacy context discussed above
when applied to the cloud computing-cybercrime fighting framework becomes even more
complex when looking at the role of EU Home Affairs Agencies active in law enforcement
('prevention and fight against crime'), such as EUROPOL. EUROPOL is excluded from the
scope of the PPCJDD (Recital 15 and Article 2.3(b)) and has developed a system of 'self-
regulatory adequacy data protection procedures' in its agreements with third countries such
as the US132.

EUROPOL's core activity is to facilitate the exchange of information between Member States
and to develop criminal intelligence. EUROPOL is also mandated to cooperate and engage in
information exchange with third parties including other EU agencies, international
organisations and third countries, as well as receive information (including personal data)
from 'private parties'133. EUROPOL is said to have become a 'data controller in its own
right'134. While awaiting for an EC proposal that is expected to bring the current EUROPOL
Decision in line with the Lisbon Treaty, EUROPOL has signalled its intention to establish
'partnerships' with the private sector (non-law enforcement actors)135. De Moor and
Vermeulen have expressed concerns about this development136, by stating that

The nature of information and intelligence from private partners - often collected in
a commercial environment for commercial purposes - requires additional
safeguards, in order to ensure the accuracy of this information... the development of
new partnerships must not occur at the expense of its own law enforcement
professionalism.

EUROPOL is entitled to establish an "outreach" to the private sector on the basis of Article
25 of the EUROPOL Convention Decision. The collection of personal data in this context

132	EUROPOL's exchange of data with third countries and bodies is both underpinned by safeguards contained in
the EUROPOL Council Decision, in the implementing rules governing EUROPOL's relations with partners and by the
cooperation agreements with third states and bodies which also include safeguards intended to ensure adequate
levels of data protection. Art. 23 of the EUROPOL Council Decision. Council of the European Union, Decision
2009/934/JHA of 30 November 2009 adopting the implementing rules governing EUROPOL's relations with
partners, including the exchange of personal data and classified information, OJ L 325/6, 11.12.2009(b).

133	See chapter IV of the EUROPOL Council Decision on "Relations with Partners". According to Article 25.1.a
'private parties' shall mean "entities and bodies established under the law of a Member State or a third State,
especially companies and firms, business associations, non-profit organisations and other legal persons governed
by private law...". For the condition under which data processing between EUROPOL and private parties may take
place refer to Article 25.3.

134	European Parliament (2011(a)), pp. 9, 41, 109. For an overview, see D. Heimans, "The External Relations of
EUROPOL - Political, Legal and Operational Considerations", in B. Martenczuk and S. van Thiel (eds), Justice,
Liberty and Security: New Challenges for EU External Relations, Brussels: VUB Press, 2008.

135	Council of the EU (2012), EUROPOL Work Programme 2013, 12667/12, Brussels, 17.7.2012, p. 27; Article 5.2
EUROPOL Decision states that EUROPOL 'shall provide support to Member States in their tasks of gathering and
analysing information from the Internet in order to assist in the identification of criminal activities facilitated by or
committed using the Internet.' Article 25.4 EUROPOL Decision allows Internet Monitoring as it states that
EUROPOL 'may directly retrieve and process data, including personal data, from publicly available sources, such as
media and public data and commercial intelligence providers.'

136	De Moor, A. and G. Vermeulen (2012), 'The EUROPOL Council Decision: Transforming EUROPOL into an Agency
of the European Union', Common Market Law Review, Vol. 47, No. 4, p. 1108: "The nature of information and
intelligence from private partners - often collected in a commercial environment for commercial purposes -
requires additional safeguards, in order to ensure the accuracy of this information... the development of new
partnerships must not occur at the expense of its own law enforcement professionalism."

45

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

takes place through EUROPOL National Units (ENU). Additionally, while EUROPOL itself
cannot send back such data directly to private entities, the situation is much less clear with
regard ENUs. Furthermore, EUROPOL is clearly being solicited by private companies with
regard its cybercrime activities, especially commercial providers of computer security
software. As discussed previously in relation with its 2011 iOCTA report, it also uses the
knowledge produced by these companies to build its own strategic analyses. It might be
necessary, in this regard, to consider the possibility of revising the 4x4 "handling code"
used by the Office to evaluate the quality of sources and codes to take into account the
dependence on private sources in the area of cybercrime137.

Such a measure, however, is a halfway house and needs to be envisaged in the framework
of a broader discussion. The lack of a concept or clear definition of 'cybercrime' within the
EU has direct implications for the functioning of the proposed European Cybercrime Centre
(EC3) as part of EUROPOL138, and creates a larger degree of uncertainty for the individual
as regards lower data protection standards for 'cybercrime' or the application of exceptions
to those standards, and whether this differs from other crimes such as 'computer crime'
and/or other 'serious crimes'. In that regard, Porcedda distinguishes broad cybercrime from
narrow cybercrime. Broad cybercrime would justify lower data protection standards but,
however, no violation of the core-periphery of human rights139.

5.	RECOMMENDATIONS

5.1. EU General Priorities

The study clearly suggests that the focus on cloud computing solely from the perspective of
cybercrime is inadequate as regards to the challenges raised by cloud computing. The
priority has been given to the regulation of internet, traceability of IP adresses, threats to
national security through cyber attacks of critical infrastructure, and some spectacular
forms of cyber crime like child pornography. Much more emphasis should be put on
providing legal certainty in jurisdiction-spanning transfers of data involving a multiplicity of
data controllers and processors. The challenges of privacy and data protection in a
cloud context are clearly underestimated, if not ignored. In most European fora
dealing with cybercrime, Data Protection laws appear to be very marginal in the agenda
and inadequately addressed to meet the challenges raised by cloud computing.

Furthermore, Data Protection offences should be recognized as a type of

"Cybercrime". This current omission unbalances the framework of investigatory powers
and Fundamental Rights, and the EU should include data protection offences in any future
plans, orientations, and strategies dealing with Cybercrime.

In the area of cloud computing, it is high time that the EU clarifies what it is that EU bodies
should be predominantly concerned with in the first place. Given the recent creation of a
EC3 within the European Police Office EUROPOL, and the forthcoming adoption of an EU
Cybersecurity strategy by the European Commission (foreseen December 2012 at the time
of writing), this is a highly needed prerequisite. The priority should be given to the
individual: her or his fundamental rights and freedoms should be as the core objective of
the Union's policy.

137	See EUROPOL (2010), EUROPOL Information Mangement: Products and Services, The Hague, 2510-271, for
further details.

138	European Commission (2012(d)), p. 7.

139	Porcedda, M.G., Data Protection and the Prevention of Cybercrime: The EU as an Area of Security?, EUI
Working Paper, Law, p. 7.

46

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

5.2. Extension of the scope of data protection and harmonization
of legal concepts

The DPD and the Proposal for a General Data Protection Regulation (PGDPR) do not apply
to law enforcement activities, nor to domestic processing, which is still governed by various
national regulatory systems in the different areas of law touched by cloud computing (i.e.
civil law, administrative and commercial law). Furthermore, old third pillar instruments such
as the DPFD and the PPCJDD do not apply to 'cloud computing providers' and to EU Home
Affairs Agencies such as EUROPOL.

This calls firstly for a harmonization of fundamental legal concepts such as
'jurisdiction', 'data processor' and 'data controller' at EU level. Such harmonization
would decrease conflicts of laws and would contribute towards more legal certainty for the
data subject/consumer as regards the applicable law. They would also play an important
role at times of addressing the challenges of jurisdiction and responsibility identified in this
study.

However, the allocation of responsibility and potential liabilities should not merely depend
on the definition of data controller and data processor. An accountability approach
should apply instead, according to which responsibilities, liabilities and obligations should
be vested upon every actor with 'considerable power', i.e. knowledge and control of the
data. This should go along with the effective use of existing Mutual Legal Assistance
Treaties between the EU and third countries with regard to access to personal data for
national security and law enforcement purposes.

Furthermore, the EU-US Safe Harbour Principles which allow transfers of data to US
organizations does not apply to telecommunication common carriers which also provide
cloud computing services. The study recommends that Safe Harbour Certification are
checked and reinforced. The 'Safe Harbor' principle should also apply to
telecommunication common carriers which also provide cloud computing services.

In regard to EUROPOL, the fact that this agency is currently excluded from the scope of the
PPCJDD calls for careful oversight of its data exchange activities. EUROPOL's core activity is
to facilitate the exchange of information between Member States and to develop criminal
intelligence. EUROPOL is also mandated to cooperate and engage in information exchange
with third parties including other EU agencies, international organisations and third
countries, as well as receive information (including personal data) from 'private parties'. In
many ways, EUROPOL has become a 'data controller in its own right'. While awaiting for an
EC proposal that is expected to bring the current EUROPOL Decision in line with the Lisbon
Treaty, it is necessary to consider the possibility of revising the 4x4 "handling code"
used by the Office to evaluate the quality of sources and codes to take into
account the dependence on private sources in the area of cybercrime.

Furthermore, the lack of a concept of 'cybercrime' within the EU has direct implications for
the functioning of the proposed EC3 as part of EUROPOL and creates a larger degree of
uncertainty for the individual as regards lower data protection standards for 'cybercrime'
and whether this differs from other crimes such as 'computer crime' and/or other 'serious
crimes'. This is why, as recommended hereafter, close oversight of the EU agencies in the
field of cybercrime is required.

47

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

5.3.	Oversight of EU agencies in the field

The EU operational framework in the field of cybercrime consists mainly of two sets of
measures which encapsulate NIS and law-enforcement activities. Here, the question of
the respective roles and responsibilities of EUROPOL and ENISA must be clarified,

if only to avoid duplication of activities and costs and ensure more effective undertakings.
Such a clarification, however, should go beyond a mere matter related to the global
regulation of the Internet and should take into account the question of the individual, her
or his rights and freedoms.

The proposed EC3 as part of EUROPOL should received careful attention. The centre
is expected to start operations in January 2013 and is entrusted with a great variety of
tasks. The way in which the European Commission envisages the role of EC3 clearly
demonstrates a lack of established priorities and, according to the EUROPOL staff,
insufficient resources given the wide scope of the centre's remit.

According to the analysis conducted in this study, the cybercrime centre could have a
significant added value if more resources were allocated to the protection of EU citizens.
This includes members of staff highly qualified in cloud computing technologies,
but also well trained in data protection and privacy laws. However, funding should
be carefully allocated. The cybercrime centre should give budgetary priorities to hunt down
cybercriminals while protecting EU citizens' rights, and not wasting resources in dubious
early warning and vain "preventive" tasks.

5.4.	US/EU Relations

Particular attention should be given to US law that authorizes the surveillance of

Cloud data of non-US residents. The EP should ask for further enquiries into the US
FISA Amendments Act, the status of the 4th Amendment with respect to NONUSPERS, and
the USA PATRIOT Act (especially s.215).

The EP should consider amending the DP Regulation to require prominent warnings
to individual data subjects (of vulnerability to political surveillance) before EU Cloud
data is exported to US jurisdiction. No data subject should be left unaware if sensitive data
about them is exposed to a 3rd country's surveillance apparatus. The existing derogations
must be dis-applied for Cloud because of the systemic risk of loss of data sovereignty. The
EU should open new negotiations with the US for recognition of a human right to privacy
which grants Europeans equal protections in US courts.

5.5.	EU ownership over data

The EU needs an industrial policy for autonomous capacity in Cloud computing. The

DG INFSO Communication of October 2012 is on this matter not in tune with the challenges
analysed in this study. A target could be that by 2020, 50% of EU public services should be
running on Cloud infrastructure solely under EU jurisdictional control.

48

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

REFERENCES

•	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2002), Working document on determining the
international application of EU data protection law to personal data processing on the
Internet by non-EU based web sites, 5035/01/EN/Final WP 56, Brussels, 30.04.2002.

•	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2008), Opinion 1/2008 on data protection
issues related to search engines, 00737/EN WP 148, Brussels, 04.04.2008.

•	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2009 (a)), The Future of Privacy Joint
contribution to the Consultation of the European Commission on the legal framework for
the fundamental right to protection of personal data, 02356/09/EN WP 168,

01.12.2009.

•	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2009 (b)), Opinion 5/2009 on online social
networking, 01189/09/EN WP 163, Brussels, 12.06.2009.

•	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2010 (a)), Opinion 3/2010 on the principle of
accountability, 00062/10/EN WP 173, Brussels, 13.07.2010.

•	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2010 (b)), Opinion 8/2010 on applicable law,
0836 02/10/EN WP 179, Brussels, 16.12.2010.

•	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2010 (c)), Opinion 1/2010 on the concepts of
'controller'and 'processor', 00264/10/EN WP 169, Brussels, 16.02.2010.

• Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2012(a)), Opinion 05.2012 on Cloud
Computing, 05/12/EN WP 196, Brussels, 01.07.2012.

•	Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2012(b)), Working Document 02.2012 setting
up a table with the elements and principles to be found in Processor Binding Corporate
Rules, 00930/12/EN WP 195, Brussels, 06.06.2012.

•	Council of Europe (1981), Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to
Automatic Processing of Personal Data' does not make a distinction between data
controller and data processor, Strasbourg, 21.1.1981

•	Council of Europe (2001), Convention on Cybercrime, Budapest, 23.11.2001.

•	Council of Europe (2010 (a)), Cloud computing and its implications on data protection,
discussion paper, prepared by Research Centre on IT and Law (CRID), 05.03.2010.

• Council of Europe (2010 (b)), Cloud Computing and cybercrime investigations:
Territoriality vs. The power of disposal, discussion paper, prepared by J. Spoenle,

31.08.2010.

•	Council of the European Union (2004), Council Framework Decision 2004/68/JHA of 22
December 2003 on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography,
OJ L 13/44, 20.1.2004.

•	Council of the European Union (2005), Council Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA of 24
February 2005 on attacks against information systems, OJ L 69/67, 16.3.2005.

• Council of the European Union (2008(a)), Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA of

27	November 2008 on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of
police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters, OJ L 350, 30.12.2008.

•	Council of the European Union (2008(b)), Council Framework Decision 2008/919/JHA of

28	November 2008 amending Framework Decision 2002/475/JHA on combating
terrorism, OJ L 330/21, 9.12.2008.

•	Council of the European Union (2009), Council Decision of 6 April 2009 establishing the
European Police Office (EUROPOL) (2009/371/JHA), OJ L 121, 15.05.2009.

•	Council of the European Union (2012), EUROPOL Work Programme 2013, 12667/12,
Brussels, 17.7.2012.

49

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

•	De Busser, E. (2012), "The Adequacy of an EU-US Partnership", in S. Gutwirth et al.
(eds.), European Data Protection: In Good Health?, Dordrecht/Heidelberg/London/New
York: Springer, 2012, pp. 203-232.

•	De Hert, P. and B. de Schutter (2008), "International Transfers of Data in the Field of
JHA: The Lessons of EUROPOL, PRN and Swift", in B. Martenczuk and S. van Thiel
(eds.), Justice, Liberty, Security: New Challenges for EU External Relations, Brussels:
VUBPress, pp.303 - 340.

•	De Hert, P. and V. Papakonstantinou (2012), "The proposed data protection Regulation
replacing Directive 95/46/EC: A sound system for the protection of individuals",
Computer Law & Security Review, Vol. 28, No. 2, April.

•	De Hert, P. and V. Papakonstantinou (2012), "The Police and Criminal Justice Data
Protection Directive: Comment and Analysis", Computers & Law Magazine of SCL, Vol.
22, No. 6, February/March.

•	De Moor, A. and G. Vermeulen (2012), "The EUROPOL Council Decision: Transforming
EUROPOL into an Agency of the European Union", Common Market Law Review, Vol. 47,
No. 4.

•	Drewer, D. and J. Ellermann (2012), "EUROPOL's data protection framework as an asset
in the fight against cybercrime", ERA Forum: Journal of the Academy of European Law,
forthcoming.

•	European Commission (2000), Commission Decision of 26 July 2000 pursuant to
Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the adequacy of
the protection provided by the safe harbour privacy principles and related frequently
asked questions issued by the US Department of Commerce, 2000/520/E, OJ L 215,
25.8.2000.

•	European Commission (2001(a)), Creating a Safe Information Society by Improving the
Security of Information Infrastructures and Combating Computer-related Crime,
COM(2000) 890 final, Brussels, 26.1.2001.

•	European Commission (2001(b)), Commission Communication on Network and
Information Security: Proposal for a European Policy Approach, COM(2001) 298 final,
Brussels, 6.6.2001.

•	European Commission (2005), Green Paper on a European Programme for Critical
Infrastructure Protection, COM(2005) 576 final, Brussels, 17.11.2005.

•	European Commission (2006), A strategy for a Secure Information Society - "Dialogue,
partnership and empowerment", COM(2006) 251 final, Brussels, 31.5.2006

•	European Commission (2007), Communication to the European Parliament, the Council
and the Committee of the Regions - Towards a general policy on the fight against cyber
crime, SEC(2007) 641, SEC(2007) 642, COM/2007/0267 final

•	European Commission (2008), Report from the Commission to the Council based on
Article 12 of the Council Framework Decision of 24 February 2005 on attacks against
information systems, COM(2008) 448 final, Brussels, 14.7.2008.

•	European Commission (2009), Critical Infrastructure Protection - Protecting Europe
from large-scale cyber-attacks and disruptions: enhancing preparedness, security and
resilience, COM(2009) 149 final, Brussels, 30.3.2009

•	European Commission (2010(a)), Communication to the European Parliament, the
Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of Regions: A Digital
Agenda for Europe, COM(2010) 245 final/2, Brussels, 26.8.2010.

•	European Commission (2010(b)), Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament
and of the Council on attacks against information systems and repealing Council
Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA, COM(2010) 517 final, Brussels, 30.09.2010.

•	European Commission (2010(c)), Communication to the European Parliament, the
Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of Regions: A

50

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

comprehensive approach on personal data protection in the European Union,
COM(2010) 609 final, Brussels, 4.11.2010.

•	European Commission (2011), Critical Information Infrastructure Protection -
Achievements and next steps: towards global cyber-security, COM(2011) 163 final,
Brussels, 31.3.2011

•	European Commission (2012(a)), Data protection reform: Frequently asked questions,
MEMO/12/41, Brussels, 25.01.2012.

•	European Commission (2012(b)), Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament
and of the Council on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of
personal data and on the free movement of such data (General Data Protection
Regulation), COM(2012) 11 final, Brussels, 25.01.2012.

•	European Commission (2012(c)), Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament
and of the Council on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of
personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of prevention, investigation,
detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and
the free movement of such data, COM(2012) 10 final, Brussels, 25.01.2012.

•	European Commission (2012(d)), Communication from the Commission to the Council
and the European Parliament Tackling Crime in our Digital Age: Establishing a European
Cybercrime Centre, COM(2012) 140 final, Brussels, 28.03.2012.

•	European Commission (2012(e)), Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the
Committee of Regions: Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in Europe,
COM(2012) 529 /2, Brussels, 27.09.2012.

•	European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) (2012), Opinion of the European Data
Protection Supervisor on the data protection reform package, 7.3.2012.

•	European Network and	Information Security	Agency	(ENISA)	(2009(a)), Cloud

computing: benefits, risks and recommendations for information security, Heraklion,
November 2009.

•	European Network and	Information Security	Agency	(ENISA)	(2009(b)), Cloud

Computing Information Assurance Framework, Heraklion, November 2009.

•	European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) (2011), Security and
resilience in governmental clouds, Heraklion, January 2011.

•	European Parliament and Council of the European Union (1995), Directive 95/46/EC of

the European Parliament	and Council of 24	October	1995 on	the protection of

individuals with regard to	the processing of personal data and on the free movement of

such data, OJ L 281, 23.11.1995.

•	European Parliament and Council of the European Union (2002), Directive 2002/58/EC
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the
processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic
communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic communications), OJ L 201,
31.7.2002.

•	European Parliament and Council of the European Union (2004), Regulation (EC) No
464/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 March 2004 establishing
the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA), OJ L 77/1, 13.3.2004.

•	European Parliament and Council of the European Union (2006), Directive 2006/24/EC
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006 on the retention of
data generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available
electronic communications services or of public communications networks and
amending Directive 2002/58/EC, OJ L 105, 13.44.2006.

51

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

•	European Parliament and Council of the European Union (2011), Directive 2011/92/EU
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on combating the
sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornography, and replacing
Council Framework Decision 2004/68/JHA, OJ L 335/1, 17.12.2011.

•	European Parliament (2000), Resolution of 16 September 1999 on the establishment of
the Charter of Fundamental Rights, OJ C 54, 25.2.2000.

•	European Parliament (2001), Report on the existence of a global system for the
interception of private and commercial communications (ECHELON interception system)
(2001/2098(INI)), PE 305.391 A5-0264/2001.

•	European Parliament (2011(a)), Implementation of the EU Charter ofFundamental
Rights and its Impact on EU Home Affairs Agencies. Frontex, EUROPOL and the
European Asylum Support Office, PE 453.196, August.

•	European Parliament (2011(b)), Towards a New EU Legal Framework for Data
Protection and Privacy, Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, PE
453.216, September.

•	European Parliament (2011(c)), Developing an EU Internal Security Strategy, fighting
terrorism and organised crime, PE 462.423, November.

•	European Parliament (2011(d)), Does it help or hinder? Promotion of Innovation on the
Internet and Citizen's Right to Privacy, PE 464.462, December.

•	European Parliament (2012(a)), Cloud Computing, Policy Department Economic and
Scientific Policy, PE 475.104, May.

•	European Parliament (2012(b)), Working Document on the protection of individuals with
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data
(General Data Protection Regulation) on the protection of individuals with regard to the
processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of prevention,
investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal
penalties, and the free movement of such data, PE491.322v01-00, Brussels, 6.7.2012.

•	European Parliament (2012(c)), Reforming the Data Protection Package, PE 492.431,
September.

•	EUROPOL, EUROPOL Information Management: Products and Services, The Hague,
2510-271, 2010

•	Hon, W.K., C. Millard and I. Walden (2011(a)), "The Problem of 'Personal Data' in Cloud
Computing - What information is Regulated? The Cloud of Unknowing, Part 1", Queen
Mary School of Law Legal Studies Research Paper No. 75/2011, March; International
Data Privacy Law, Vol. 2, No. 4, November.

•	Hon, W.K., C. Millard and I. Walden (2011 (b)), "Who is responsible for 'Personal Data'
in Cloud Computing? The Cloud of Unknowing, Part 2", Queen Mary School of Law Legal
Studies Research Paper No. 77/2011, March, International Data Privacy Law, 2012, Vol.
2, No. 1, February.

•	Hon, W.K., J. Hornle and C. Millard (2011), "Data Protection Jurisdiction and Cloud
Computing - When are Cloud Users and Providers Subject to EU Data Protection Law?
The Cloud of Unknowing, Part 3", Queen Mary School of Law Legal Studies Research
Paper No. 84/2011, February.

•	Hon, W.K. and C. Millard (2012), "Data Export in Cloud Computing - How can Personal
Data be Transferred Outside the EEA? The Cloud of Unknowing, Part 4", SCRIPTed, Vol.
9, No. 1, April.

•	Hustinx, P., "Data Protection and Cloud Computing under EU Law", Third European
Cyber Security Awareness Day BSA, European Parliament, 13 April 2010.

•	Kuner, C. (2010), "Data Protection Law and International Jurisdiction on the Internet

(Part 2)", International Journal of Law and Information Technology , Vol. 18., No. 3.,
Fall,	available	at	SSRN:

http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id = 1689495&rec=1&srcabs=1496847

52

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

•	Porcedda, M.G., "Data Protection and the Prevention of Cybercrime: The EU as an Area
of Security?", EUI Working Paper, Law, No. 25.

•	Poulet, Y. et al. (2011), "Data Protection in the Clouds", in. Gutwirth et al. (eds.),

Computers, Privacy and Data Protection:	an Element of Choice,

Dordrecht/Heidelberg/London/New York: Springer, 2011, pp. 377-409.

•	Reding, V., "Binding Corporate Rules: unleashing the potential of the digital single
market and cloud computing", IAPP Europe Data Protection Congress, Paris,

29.11.2011.

•	Ruiter, J. and W. Martijn, "Privacy Regulations for Cloud Computing: Compliance and
Implementation in Theory and Practice", in S. Gutwirth et al. (eds.), Computers, Privacy
and Data Protection: an Element of Choice, Dordrecht/Heidelberg/London/New York:
Springer, 2011, pp. 361-376.

•	Sartor, G. (2012), "Providers' Liabilities in the New EU Data Protection Regulation: A
Threat to Internet Freedoms?", EUI Working Papers, Law, No. 24.

•	Strange, S. (1992) "States, Firms and Diplomacy", International Affairs, 68(1): 1-15.

53

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

ANNEXES

Annex 1: The EU framework on fighting cybercrime and privacy - initiatives and EU bodies involved

The starting point adopted to map each initiative is an initiative from the European Commission. This does not preclude that these
initiatives might have been prompted by another body of the EU, e.g. the Council.

N/A = not applicable/ not available.

Initiative	'Lead' service (Commission)	Council  configurations	Parliament  Committee	
Creating a Safe Information Society by Improving the Security of Information Infrastructures and Combating Computer-related Crime, COM(2000) 890 final	DG INFSO DG JHA	Justice and Home Affairs  Competitiveness  Transport, Telecommunications and Energy	Responsibl  e  LIBE	Opinion  ECON  JURI  ITRE  CULT
Network and Information Security: Proposal for a European Policy Approach, COM(2001) 298 final	DG INFSO	Transport, Telecommunications and Energy  General Affairs  Economic and Financial Affairs (ECOFIN)	Responsibl  e  LIBE	Opinion  JURI  ITRE  CULT
Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Network and Information Security Agency, COM(2003) 63 final	DG INFSO	Transport, Telecommunications and Energy  Justice and Home Affairs	Responsibl  e  ITRE	Opinion  BUDG  LIBE  JURI
A strategy for a Secure Information Society - "Dialogue, partnership and empowerment", COM(2006) 251 final	DG INFSO	Transport, Telecommunications and Energy	N/A	

54

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

General Affairs

Economic	and

Financial	Affairs

(ECOFIN)

Towards a general policy on the fight against cyber crime, COM(2007) 267 final	DG JLS	General Affairs	N/A	
Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 460/2004 establishing the European Network and Information Security Agency as regards its duration, COM(2007) 861 final	DG INFSO	Transport, Telecommunications and Energy  General Affairs	Responsibl  e  ITRE	Opinion  LIBE
Critical Infrastructure Protection - Protecting Europe from large-scale cyber-attacks and disruptions: enhancing preparedness, security and resilience, COM(2009) 149 final	DG INFSO	Transport, Telecommunications and Energy	N/A	
Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on combating the sexual abuse, sexual exploitation of children and child pornography, repealing Framework Decision 2004/68/JHA, COM(2010) 94 final	DG Justice	Justice and Home Affairs  General Affairs	Responsibl  e  LIBE	Opinion  CULT  FEMM
Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on attacks against information systems and repealing Council Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA, COM(2010) 517 final	DG Home	Justice and Home Affairs	Responsibl  e  LIBE	Opinion  AFET  BUDG  ITRE
Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 460/2004 establishing the European Network and Information Security Agency as regards its duration, COM(2010) 520 final	DG INFSO	Transport, Telecommunications and Energy	Responsibl  e  ITRE	Opinion  N/A
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection - Achievements and next steps: towards global cyber-security, COM(2011) 163 final	DG INFSO	Transport, Telecommunications and Energy	Responsibl  e  ITRE	Opinion  AFET  LIBE
Tackling Crime in Our Digital Age: Establishing a European Cybercrime Centre, COM(2012) 140 final	DG Home	Justice and Home Affairs	Responsibl  e  LIBE	Opinion  INTA

55

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

BUDG

ECON

ITRE

JURI

56

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

Annex 2: Estimates of EC3 staffing requirements and costs

These informations have been forwarded by Europol.

EC3 personnel and expenditures in relation to overall EUROPOL staff and
expenditures

Big figures: 800 people are working at Europol. Of them:

•	530 Europol Employees (440 Temporary Agents and 90 Contract Agents.)

•	40 Seconded National Experts,

•	150 Liaison Officers ,

•	The rest (variable) about 20 trainees and 60 contractors.

Note:

o Contract Agents are mainly working in the Governance and Capabilities
Departments

o SNEs, all of them members of the National Competent LE Services, are fully
integrated in different Units of the Operations Department

Temporary Agents in the Establishment Plan 2012: 457. Of them:

•	226 in Operations

•	162 in Capabilities

•	61 in Governance

•	8 (Director, MB Secretariat and Internal Audit Function)

The Operations Department is organized in 4 Business Areas with the following staff
(TAs + 40 SNEs):

•	Information Hub: 60

•	Cybercrime: 31

•	Counterterrorism: 55

•	Organised Crime 120

The EC3 Cvbercrime Centre is organized in 3 main groups:

•	Operations and Data fusion

•	Research and Development

•	Strategy and Outreach

Most of the current staff is in Operations: 22 staff members have been transferred from
the old Europol structure working in 3 focal points covering the three areas of the EC3
mandate: Crimes against persons trough the Internet, on-line fraud and crimes affecting
the ICT infrastructures. The rest (9) are distributed in the other groups.

That means that only Operations can continue delivering services (although not at the
desired level of the EC3 mandate). The other areas must be properly staffed to achieve
the mandate of the Centre. Our analysis, based on the products and services to be
delivered, is that 60 FTEs will be needed in 2013 and 100 in 2014.

In general terms Operations and Data Fusion (about 75% of the resources of the Centre)
will be staffed with TAs, police officers recruited from the Competent Services. The rest
25% distributed in Research and Development and Strategy and Outreach does not need
to be recruited from the Competent Services.

All of them need to be specialists in their respective areas and most of them will occupy
long-term positions. Only in the case of Outreach some SNEs from the target Countries
will be preferred for seconded for maximum 3 years in order to rotate and be replaced by
others from a different target country.

It will not be excluded the recruitment of some contract agents to develop specific
projects.

57

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Breakdown of EC3 costs for 2013-2014

2013

Expense	Explanation	Updated budget
Staff expenditure	29 Total of new recruited staff (31 existed staff are budgeted in general Europol budget - T1)  Other staff and recruitment expenditure	2,850,000
One time expenditure - investment	Building related cost, facility and IT equipments	2,200,300
Running activities related expenditure	Day to day running costs for missions, meetings, consultancy, trainings and software upgrades and IT maintenance	1,305,400
		6,355,700

2014

Expense	Explanation	Updated budget
Staff expenditure	69 recruited staff for EC3 (31 existed staff are budgeted in the general Europol budget - T1)  Other staff and recruitment expenditure	6,808,000
One time expenditure - investment	Building related cost, facility and IT equipments	760,000
Running activities related expenditure	Day to day running costs for missions, meetings, consultancy, trainings and software upgrades and IT maintenance	2,293,500
		9,861,500

Source : EUROPOL documents EDOC 621532 & 615458

58

Fighting cyber crime and protecting privacy in the cloud

Annex 3: Definitional problems, Member States' discretion under the DPD

DPD for international processing, the question of applicable national implementing law

Data controllor& data processor

The who question: who is the data controllor & data processor? National definition.
The where question: Where are the data controllor and data processor?

Personal data

The what question: What are personal data? National definition and definition in the DPD

Responsibilities / Legal liabilities / Rights / Data transfers

The how question: how are responsibilities, legal liabilities, rights and data transfers defined? National

definition and definition in the DPD

59

POLICY DEPARTMENT i;

CITIZENS' RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS W

Role

Policy departments are research units that provide specialised advice
to committees, inter-parliamentary delegations and other parliamentary bodies.

Policy Areas

Constitutional Affairs

Justice, Freedom and Security

Gender Equality

Legal and Parliamentary Affairs

Petitions

Documents

Visit the European Parliament website: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/studies

PHOTO CREDIT: ¡Stock International Inc.

ISBN