DYNAMIC PAGE - HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET // SI / TK // REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL



Web search
Agenev-all Emails
SID-all Emails

NSA Rolodex

SIDtodav Blog
SIDtodav Series
SIOINT Worldwide VTC

•	SIDtodav Article

•	Letter to the Editor

•	SIGINT-v Social Media Page

(S//REL) NSA Lends Support to Upcoming G8 and G20 Summits

FROM

Strategic Intelligence Issues (SI7)

Run Date: 06/23/2010

in Canada

(S//REL) President Obama will travel to Canada to participate in the G8

and G20 Summit

from 25 to 27 June. NSA is actively assisting executive protection and evei it security, and
providing support to policymakers.

Background (U)

(U) As host, Canada has set this G8 Summit's theme: Recovery and New Beginning. On the G8

agenda are international development (health, food security, natural resources
change); and peace and security (nonproliferation and Afghanistan-Pakistan).

(U) The G20 Summit is to focus on implementing the September 2009 Pittsburgh G20 Summit';

trade, and climate

framework for strong and balanced world economic growth. Also on the agenda are intemationa 1
financial institutions' reform and re-financing, financial sector regulatory refoipi, and countering
trade protectionism.

,4

Summit Venues (U)

(U) The G8 Summit will be held on 25 and 26 June in Huntsville, in Ontario's
(The G8 Summit venue is also called Muskoka.) The G20 Summit will be he!
June in Toronto, Ontario - about 140 miles south of Huntsville. A preparatory
Gz0 sherpas (aides and personal representatives of the heads of state and govr
23 and 24 June in Toronto.

Threat Potential (U)

Muskoka Region,
on 26 and 27
meeting among
mment) is set for

(S//REL) The Intelligence Community assesses that there is no specific, credit L
al-Qa'ida or other Islamic extremists are targeting the G8 and G20 Summits. A1
associated groups, however, have expressed interest in targeting Canada in the
Summits may provide an attractive target for terrorists seeking to capitalize on

coverage.

(S//REL) The Community judges, however, that issue-based extremists pose a
to the Summits. These extremists have conducted acts of vandalism at previous
summits. Similar disruptive activity will probably occur throughout the Summi
more concentrated during the G20 in Toronto.

G8 and G20 Summit Participants (U)

(U) The G8 -- the Group of Eight - is both the forum of eight industrialized m .1
annual, rn&ting of the heads of state or governmenjlof these eight nations: Can ada,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, United Kingdom’, and the United States. For the
Summit, Canada has invited the leaders of Algeria, Egypt, Ethiopia, Malawi,
and South Africa to participate in an Africa outreach session. Also invited are
and Jamaica.

e information that
-Qa'ida and
past, and the
the media

more likely threat
G8 and G20
ts, and will be

itions and the
France,
Huntsville G8
Nigeria, Senegal,
Colombia, Haiti,

f'i

(U) The G20 - the Group of Twenty ~ consists of the G8 members plus: Argo;
Brazil, China, European Union, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, South
Korea, and Turkey. Also invited to attend the Toronto G20 Summit are: Ethio x
Netherlands, Nigeria, Spain, and Vietnam, plus the Financial Stability Board,
Monetary Fund, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Developmejn
Nations and its International Labour Organization, the World Bank Group,
Organization. (The next G20 Summit will be held during November 2010 in
Korea.)

ntina, Australia,
Africa, South
ia, Malawi,
he International
it, the United
the World Trade
Sleoul, South

and

Intelligence Community Support Structure (U)

(S//REL) The Director of National Intelligence Representative (DNIR) in Otta
States Government (USG) intelligence lead for the G8 and G20 Summits. The
Events Intelligence Coordinator (SEIC) will operate a Threat Integration Cent :
U.S. Embassy in Ottawa to support him during both events. The TIC began n<
22 June, and will operate 0600 to 2100 EDT from 24 through 27 June. The
twice daily Situation Report, respond to Requests for Information and coordin^i
dissemination of intelligence and pre-event assessments.

TIC

NSA Support to Event Security (U)

(S//REL) Relevant SID reporting offices are aware of the Summits and poised
timely matter intelligence related to the events. While NSA will have no physib
TIC, direct coordination will be through the CTMMC and NSOC. who will fu thi
with the Special U.S. Liaison Office, Ottawa (SUSLOO) staff and provide thr< i
directly to the venues. NSA support planning has been closely coordinated wii
partner through SUSLOO.

(S//SI//REL) NSA support to both events may include, but is not limited to: executive protection
U.S. policy goals, situational awareness, threat information, and local security posture. Reporting
instructions have been published by SI 2 in "SIGINT Reporting in Support of the G8 and G20
Summits, Canada, June 2010" (ISS-148-10). A SIGINT collaborative workspace has been
established for the G8 and G20 Summits on Extended Shared Enterprise Corporate Server
(ESECS). See "CASE-2010-99: (U//FOUQ1G8 and G20 Summits in Canada. 25-27 June." A

wa is the United
DNI's Special
:r (TIC) in the
ojrmal operations o|
will publish a
te the

to report in a
al presence in thi
er collaborate
at warning
the Canadian

Wikiinfo page G8-G20 Canada 2010 has been created for the Summits, and ac ditional
information may be found at the SI7 Economics and Global Issues G8/G20 website.

(S//REL) CTMMC will be the focal point for 24/7 CT operations, employing
to ensure timely and effective distribution of threat tippers and lead informatio
CT activities related to any threat situation, and to facilitate foreign release requests.

r ormal procedures
a, to coordinate

(C//REL) SI 1 l's SCC desk will be responsible for coordinating RFIs and responses, while
NSOC/CRSMM will respond to time critical RFIs after hours. NSOC/CRSMM will also
coordinate drafts of the TIC's twice-daily sitreps.

(C//REL) NSOC/APSMM will provide reachback to TOPIs and extended entei prise for policy
support issues using normal call-in procedures and instructions.

(S//REL) NSOC/SRO will facilitate after-hour requests for release of non-thren
while S12's Partnership Dissemination Cell (PDC) will perform this function d
hours.

t information,
uring normal duty

(S//REL) NSA's Event lead, S17 Strategic Intelligence Issues, will work extended hours,
approximately 0600 to 2200 EDT through 27 June to maintain situational awareness of SIGINT
capabilities and facilitate coordination across the SIGINT system and with the IC

(S//REL) SUSLOO personnel will be available for call-in by CTMMC, NSOC or SI7 to provide
local support to the TIC for imminent threat situations.

Customer Requirements (U)

(S//REL) There are currently seven limited and six standing Information Need > related to the two
summits.

For Further Info (U)