 TEMPDRA -- "The Werltl'a largest -- Is. New
Available tn Quali?ed NBA Users

FROM: 

NSA Integ'ree at GCHQ
Run Date: QIEDIE

SIGINT We have all heard about Big Data; new you can get
Big Access to Big Data.

luf?

What happens when ene site centains mere data than all ether
ms cembined? At mere than 1D times larger than the neth biggest
TEMPGRA at GQHQ is the werld's largest and the
NSA werkferce is new getting greater access te it. This massive site uses ever 
machines te precess and make available te mere than 4D billien pieces ef
centent a day. And starting teday, skilled NSA users can get access te
the TEMPGBA database via the KRIS-Central interface.

What is TEMPDBA is GGHQ's "Internet
buffer" which enpleits the mest valuable Internet links available te GGHQ.
TEMPGBA prevides a pewerful discevery capability against Middle East, Nerth
African and Eurepean target sets [ameng ethers}. whe have bene?ted
frem GGHQ Special Seurce accesses like INGENSEB er MUSGULAB will almest
certainly bene?t frem TEMPGBA.

Hew valuable is The value and utility 
were preven early inte a S-menth evaluatien that began this past March. With a
limited user base TEMPGBA became the secend mest valuable
access fer discevery. Additienally, this small greup ef 
preduced ever end-preduct reperts and previded critical suppert te SIGINT,
defensive, and cyber missien elements.

Why TEMPGBA prevides the ability te de centent-based
discevery and develepment acress a large array efhigh-prierity signals. Similar te
ether depleyments, TEMPGBA effectively "slews dewn" a large chunk
efInternet data, previding with three werking days te use the surgical
teelkit ef the GENESIS language te discever data that etherwise weuld have been
missed. This tradecraft discovery using the GENESIS language
is a critical teel in the analyst's discevery teel kit, and nicely cemplements the
existing and well-knewn tradecrafts efstreng selectien targeting and bulk
meta-data analysis.

How do I get an account? Te cemply with GGHQ pelicy and te
ensure users are successful in such a large-scale envirenment, TEMPGBA access
requires users te be pre?cient with At NSA this is achieved via the
cempletien efvarieus KRIS Skilz achievements. Beginning teday, users will see a
new achievement, which requires users te have remained current with
their UK Legalities training be a level 3 er higher KRIS Skils user, and
have used GENESIS by either querying er authering ?ngerprints. Users whe meet
these criteria will autematically be given TEMPGBA access in their HES Gentral
acceunt.

What do I need to knew about using Altheugh
TEMPGBA will appear as an additienal database in KRIS Central, there are seme
impertant items need te be aware efwhen they search this database.
are asked te pay clese attentien te details cencerning the UK Legality
requirements en the TEMPDRA user-guidance wiki page. TEMPGBA queries must
cemply with beth UK and US. legal requirements, and the analytic cemmunity
must ensure we are using this access wisely and cempliantly.

lief-s

Hew can I learn mere aheut using Ifyeu'd like te
get TEMPGBA access but need seme help ful?lling the pre?ciency requirements,
the Outreach Team is ready te help. The team recently added an
additienal reund training sessiens en EBS, which users can sign up
fer via this link. Alse, can find great tradecraft and training tips via the
er they can centact the team directly at DL KKS_Mentering.

Fer mere infermatien "ge er centact?

 

 

Netes:

is a cemputer-netwerk enpleitatien system that
cembines high-speed filtering with SIGDEE perferms filtering and
selectien te enable te quickly find infermatien they need based en what
they already knew, but it alse perferms functiens such as target
develepment te allew te discever new seurces efinfermatien.

'3.qu

Llef?

