They’ve got it
taped

In the booming surveillance industry they
spy on whom they wish, when they wish,
protected by barriers of secrecy, fortified
by billions of pounds worth of high, high
technology. Duncan Campbell reports
from the United States on the secret
Anglo-American plan for a global
electronic spy system for the 21st
century capable of listening in to most of us
most of the time

American, British and Allied intelligence
agencies are soon to embark on a
massive, billion-dollar expansion of
their global electronic surveillance
system. According to information
given recently in secret to the US Congress, the
surveillance system will enable the agencies to
monitor and analyse civilian communications
into the 21st century. Identified for the moment
as Project P415, the system will be run by the
US National Security Agency (NSA). But the
intelligence agencies of many other countries
will be closely involved with the new network,
including those from Britain, Australia, Ger-
many and Japan—and, surprisingly, the
People’s Republic of China.

New satellite stations and monitoring centres
are to be built around the world, and a chain of
new satellites launched, so that NSA and its
British counterpart, the Government Commu-
nications Headquarters (GCHQ) at Chelten-
ham, may keep abreast of the burgeoning inter-
national telecommunications traffic.

The largest overseas station in the Project
P415 network is the US satellite and communi-
cations base at Menwith Hill, near Harrogate in
Yorkshire. It is run undercover by the NSA and
taps into all Britain’s main national and interna-
tional communications networks (New State-
sman, 7 August 1980). Although high techno-
logy stations such as Menwith Hill are primarily
intended to monitor international communica- 10

10

tions, according to US experts their capability
can be, and has been, turned inwards on
domestic traffic. Menwith Hill, in particular, has
been accused by a former employee of gross
corruption and the monitoring of domestic calls.

The vast international global eavesdropping
network has existed since shortly after the
second world war, when the US, Britain, Can-
ada, Australia and New Zealand signed a secret
agreement on signals intelligence, or “sigint”. It
was anticipated, correctly, that electronic moni-
toring of communications signals would continue
to be the largest and most important form of
post-war secret intelligence, as it had been
through the war.

Although it is impossible for analysts to listen
to all but a small fraction of the billions of
telephone calls, and other signals which might
contain “significant” information, a network of
monitoring stations in Britain and elsewhere is
able to tap all international and some domestic
communications circuits, and sift out messages
which sound interesting. Computers automa-
tically analyse every telex message or data
signal, and can also identify calls to, say, a target
telephone number in London, no matter from
which country they originate.

A secret listening agreement, called UKUSA
(UK-USA), assigns parts of the globe to each
participating agency. GCHQ at Cheltenham is
the co-ordinating centre for Europe, Africa and
the Soviet Union (west of the Ural Mountains).

12 AUGUST 1988

The NSA covers the rest of the Soviet Union and
most of the Americas. Australia—where
another station in the NSA listening network is
located in the outback—co-ordinates the elec-
tronic monitoring of the South Pacific, and South
East Asia.

With 15,000 staff qnd a budget of over £500
million a year (even without the planned new
Zircon spy satellite), GCHQ is by far the largest
part of British intelligence. Successive UK gov-

ernments have placed high value on its eaves-
dropping capabilities, whether against Russian
military signals or the easier commercial and
private civilian targets.	.

Both the new and existing surveillance
systems are highly computerised. They rely on
near total interception of international commer-
cial and satellite communications in order to
locate the telephone or other messages of target
individuals. Last month, a US newspaper, the

11

Cleveland Plain Dealer, revealed that the
system had been used to target the telephone
calls of a US Senator, Strom Thurmond. The
fact that Thurmond, a southern Republican and
usually a staunch supporter of the Reagan admi-
nistration, is said to have been a target has
raised fears that the NSA has restored
domestic, electronic, surveillance programmes.
These were originally exposed and criticised
during the Watergate investigations, and their
closure ordered by President Carter.

After talking to the NSA, Thurmond later told
the Plain Dealer that he did not believe the
allegation. But Thurmond, a right-wing Republi-
can, may have been unwilling to rock the boat.
Staff members of the Permanent Select Com-
mittee on Intelligence said that staff were “digg-
ing into it” despite the “stratospheric security
classification” of all the systems involved.

The Congressional officials were first told of
the Thurmond interception by a former
employee of the Lockheed Space and Missiles
Corporation, Margaret Newsham, who now
lives in Sunnyvale, California. Newsham had
originally given separate testimony and filed a
lawsuit concerning corruption and mis-spending
on other US government “black” projects. She
has worked in the US and Britain for two corpo-
rations which manufacture signal intelligence
computers, satellites and interception equip-
ment for NSA, Ford Aerospace and Lockheed.
Citing a special Executive Order signed by Pres-
ident Reagan, she told me last month that she
could not and would not discuss classified infor-
mation with journalists. But according to
Washington sources (and the report in the Plain
Dealer) she informeda US Congressman that
the Thurmond interception took place at Men-
with Hill, and that she personally heard the call
and was able to pass on details.

Since then, investigators have subpoenaed
other witnesses and asked them to provide the
complete plans and manuals of the ECHELON
system and related projects. The plans and
blueprints are said to show that targeting of US
political figures would not occur by accident, but
was designed into the system from the start.

While working at Menwith Hill, Newsham is
reported to have said that she was able to listen
through earphones to telephone calls being
monitored at the base. Other conversations that
she heard were in Russian. After leaving Men-
with Hill, she continued to have access to full
details of Menwith Hill operations from a posi-
tion as software manager for more than a dozen
VAX computers at Menwith which operate the
ECHELON system.

Newsham refused last month to discuss clas-
sified details of her career, except with cleared
Congressional officials. But it has been publicly
acknowledged that she worked on a large range
of so-called “black” US intelligence program-
mes, whose funds are concealed inside the costs
of other defence projects. She was fired from
Lockheed four years ago after complaining
about the corruption, and sexual harassment.

Lockheed claimed she had been a pook time-
keeper, and has denied her charges of corrup-
tion on “black” projects. But the many charges
she is reported to have made—such as the use
of top secret computers for football pools, or to
sell a wide range of merchandise from their
offices, and deliberate and massive overcharg-

NEW STATESMAN & SOCIETY

ing and waste by the company—are but small
beer in a continuing and wider scandal about
defence procurement. Newsham’s testimony
about overcharging by contractors is now the
subject of a major congressional inquiry.

From US sources not connected with Marga-
ret Newsham, we have obtained for the first
time a list of the major classified projects in
operation at Menwith Hill. The base currently
has over 1,200 staff, more than two thirds of
them Americans. Other than the ECHELON
computer network, the main projects at Men-
with Hill are code-named SILKWORTH,
MOONPENNY, SIRE, RUNWAY and
STEEPLEBUSH. The station also receives in-
formation from a satellite called BIG BIRD.

Project SILKWORTH is, according to signals
intelligence specialists, the code-name for long-
range radio monitoring from Menwith Hill.
MOONPENNY is a system for monitoring satel-
lite communications; RUNWAY is thought to be
the control network for an eavesdropping satel-
lite called VORTEX, now in orbit over the
Soviet Union. The base earlier controlled a
similar series of satellites called CHALET. The
new STEEPLEBUSH control centre appears

connected with the latest and biggest of the
overhead listening satellites. These are code-
named MAGNUM, according to US intelligence
sources.

BIG BIRD, which is not usually connected
with Menwith Hill, is a low-orbiting photo-
graphic reconnaissance satellite. But inve-
stigators have worked out, from details of the
clearances necessary to know about BIG BIRD,
that this satellite—and indeed, many other
satellites, variously disguised as “weather satel-
lites”—also carry listening equipment. One
such sigint package is said to have been aboard
the doomed space shuttle Challenger, despite
its ostensibly civilian purpose.

Recently published US Department of
Defense 1989 budget information has confirmed
that the Menwith Hill spy base will be the subject
of a major $26 million expansion programme.
Information given to Congress in February
listed details of plans for a four-year expansion of
the main operation building and other facilities at
Menwith Hill. Although the testimony referred
only to a “classified location”, the base can be
identified because of references to STEEPLE-
BUSH. According to this testimony, the new
STEEPLEBUSH II project will cost $15 million
between now and 1993. The expansion is re-
quired to avoid overcrowding and “to support
expanding classified missions”.

During the Watergate affair, it was revealed

that NSA, in collaboration with GCHQ, had
routinely intercepted the international commu-
nications of prominent anti-Vietnam war leaders
such as Jane Fonda and Dr Benjamin Spock.
Another target was former Black Panther leader
Eldridge Cleaver. Then in the late 1970s, it was
revealed that President Carter had ordered
NSA to stop obtaining “back door” intelligence
about US political figures through swapping in-
telligence data with GCHQ Cheltenham.

Among important stations being developed in
the new P415 network, sources indicated, are
Bude in Cornwall, mainly run by GCHQ, Bad
Aibling in Germany, and two sites in the
People’s Republic of China (which are used only
for monitoring the USSR). The western intelli-
gence agencies have not yet resolved the ques-
tion of how to replace the recently upgraded
British intelligence listening station at Chung
Horn Kok in Hong Kong (which at the moment
listens to China itself) when the colony is handed
back to China next decade.

In Australia three months ago, New Zealand
Defence Minister Bob Tizard revealed that two
Australasian interception stations planned for
the early 1990s will be targeted on new commu-

nications satellites launched by third world coun-
tries such as India and Indonesia. The new
satellite spy bases are at Geraldton in northern
Australia and Blenheim, New Zealand. The simi-
lar British spy base at Morwenstow, near Bude,
Cornwall, has been continuously expanded
throughout the 1980s, including the provision of
massive US analysis computers.

If Margaret Newsham’s testimony is con-
firmed by the ongoing Congressional investiga-
tion, then the NSA has been behaving illegally
under US law—unless it can prove either that
Thurmond’s call was intercepted completely
accidentally, or that the highly patriotic Senator
is actually a foreign spy or terrorist. Moreover
NSA’s international phone tapping operations
from Menwith Hill and at Morwenstow, Corn-
wall, can only be legal in Britain if special war-
rants have been issued by the Secretary of State
to specify that American intelligence agents are
persons to whom information from intercepts
must or should be given. This can not be establ-
ished, since the government has always refused
to publish any details of the targets or recipients
of specific interception warrants.

When the Menwith Hill base was first set up
there was no British law controlling phone tap-
ping, or making unauthorised interception (such
as by foreign intelligence agencies) illegal. Now
there is, and telecommunications interception
by the Americans from British territory would

clearly be illegal without the appropriate war-
rant.

When the new Interception of Communica-
tions Act was passed in 1985, however, it was
obviously designed to make special provision for
operations like ECHELON or Project P415 to
trawl all international communications to and
from Britain. A special section of the Act, Sec-
tion 3(2), allows warrants to be issued to inter-
cept any general type of international messages
to or from Britain if this is “in the interests of
national security” or “for the purpose of safe-
guarding the economic well-being of the United
Kingdom”. Such warrants also allow GCHQ to
tap any or all other communications on the same
cables or satellites that may have to be picked up
in order to select out the messages they want.
So whether or not a British government warrant
can legally allow American agents to intercept
private British communications, there is no
doubt that British law as well as British bases
have been designed to encourage rather than
inhibit the booming industry in international tele-
communications surveillance.

Both British and American domestic commu-
nications are also being targeted and intercepted
by the ECHELON network, the US inve-
stigators have been told. The agencies are al-
leged to have collaborated not only on targeting
and interception, but also on the monitoring of
domestic UK communications.

Special teams from GCHQ Cheltenham have
been flown in secretly in the last few years to a
computer centre in Silicon Valley near San Fran-
cisco for training on the special computer
systems that carry out both domestic and inter-
national interception.

The centre near San Francisco has also been
used to train staff from the “Technical Depart-
ment” of the People’s Liberation Army General
Staff, which is the Chinese version of GCHQ.
The Department operates two ultra-secret joint
US-Chinese listening stations in the Xinjiang
Uighur Autonomous Region, close to the Soviet
Siberian border. Allegedly, such surveillance
systems are only used to target Soviet or War-
saw Pact communications signals, and those
suspected of involvement in espionage and ter-
rorism. But those involved in ECHELON have
stressed to Congress that there are no formal
controls over who may be targeted. And I have
been told that junior intelligence staff can feed
target names into the system at all levels,
without any check on their authority to do so.
Witnesses giving evidence to the Congressional
inquiry have discussed whether the Democratic
presidential contender Jesse Jackson was tar-
geted; one source implied that he had been.
Even test engineers from manufacturing compa-
nies are able to listen in on private citizens’
communications, the inquiry was told.

But because of the special Executive Order
signed by President Reagan, US intelligence
operatives who know about such politically sen-
sitive operations face jail sentences if they speak
out—despite the constitutional American pro-
tection of freedom of speech and of the press.
And in Britain, as we know, the government is in
the process of tightening the Official Secrets Act
to make the publication of any information from
intelligence officials automatically a crime, even
if the information had already been published, or
had appeared overseas first.	0

Special teams from GCHQ Cheltenham have
been flown in secretly to a computer centre near
San Francisco for training on computer systems
that carry out domestic and international
interception

12

12 AUGUST 1988