DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET SI TK REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL

SID Today archives feedback

Welcome! Saturday, 10 Nov 2012


I SIDtoday Article
0 Let?r the Editor
Social Media Page
Who Else Is Targeting Your Target? Collecting Data Stolen by Hackers
FROM: Menwith Hill Station (F77)

Run Date: 05/06/2010

Hackers are stealing the emails of some of our by collecting the hackers? "take," we 1) get access to the emails themselves and 2) get insights into who's being hacked.

People who open attachments from unknown senders (gasp) or respond to "Nigerian" money laundering emails aren't the only individuals on the intemet being hacked. Some ofour targets are also being targeted by outside forces, both by state-sponsored and freelance hackers. Could your targets communications be the
target ofother countries or groups?

Recently, Communications Security Establishment Canada (CSEC) and Menwith Hill Station discovered and began exploiting a target-rich data set being stolen by hackers. The hackers' sophisticated email-stealing intrusion set is known as INTOLERANT. Ofthe traffic observed, nearly half contains category hits
because the attackers are targeting email accounts of interest to the Intelligence Community. Although a relatively new data source, TOPIs have already written multiple reports based on INTOLERANT collect.
(U) Technique

To the analyst using SIGINT databases, collected INTOLERANT data looks like Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) mail. In this case, though, the traf?c fairy has been hard at To hide the traffic, the hackers' programs split a victim's email into pieces. Each piece is then obfuscated, given a different, spoofed,
source IP address and sent to a different destination IP address. Having different destination IP addresses serves to route the pieces across separate channelsl ofa satellite signal. The channels being used carry large amounts oftraf?c, allowing INTOLERANT data to hide as background noise. Much collaboration between CSE, MHS,
GCHQ and NSAW has brought about the transformation data we collect into "readable" SMTP mail.

Victim Set

INTOLERANT traffic is very organized. Each event is labeled to identify and categorize victims. Cyber attacks commonly apply descriptors to each victim - it helps herd victims and track which attacks succeed and which fail. Victim categories make INTOLERANT interesting:
A Indian Diplomatic Indian Navy

Central Asian diplomatic

Chinese Human Rights Defenders

Tibetan Pro-Democracy Personalities

Uighur Activists

European Special Rep to Afghanistan and Indian photo-joumalism

Tibetan Government in Exile

New victims appear to ?ood out their entire inbox, going back months or, even, years. Then only new mail is transmitted. Hundreds ofemails are seen on an average day.
(U) Attribution

Within the world ofcyber exploitation, attribution is always difficult and INTOLERANT is no exception. Initial analysis points toward a likely state sponsor based on the level ofsophistication and the victim set. Determining which state is sponsoring the activity has yet to be done. Since the traffic is traveling over satellite,
the culprit must be within the satellite beam's footprint to receive the stolen emails. There was hope the footprint would point to which state was responsible, but that hope was not realized as shown in the image.

 



 

Attribution data is di?icult, since the satellite beam footprint is so large. Eventually, the virtual team working this e?ort would like to know who is hacking whom.
(U) Way Forward

Analysis continues with the goal ofleaming more about the attacks as well as improving attribution. Efforts are also being made to inform relevant parties, including NTOC, due to the obvious operations security (OPSEC) concerns where US and UK authorities have contact with Indian diplomats or the European Special
Representative, for instance.

So the next time you scan your target?s email, [my special attention to the case notation. Ifit contains 4PXFIL2 (E9BDJ4PXFILtargetNumber in the case then the email is likely available because somebody else has hacked your target. For additional details, send an email to mhsindex@nsa.ic.gov.

POCs: INDEX team 

(U) Notes:
1. Packet Identifiers, PIDs are used in satellite hub signals to designate sub-channels.
2. 4PXFIL stands for "fourth party exfil" or "out-sourcing These terms are used within the SIGINT community to refer to the practice of collecting data as it transits the Internet going from the victim's computer to the attacker's.
SIDtoday editor's note: This article is reprinted from Horizon newsletter, March edition.
Comments/ estions a out this article?
E1 SIDtoday articles may not be republished or reposted outside without the consent of 

Information Owner: Page Publisher: 
Last Modified: 11/10/2012 Last Reviewed: 11/10/2012

DYNAMIC PAGE -- HIGHEST POSSIBLE CLASSIFICATION IS
TOP SECRET SI TK REL TO USA AUS CAN GBR NZL
DERIVED FROM: 1-52, DATED 08 JAN 2007 DECLASSIFY ON: 20320108

